Title: M.C. Luthra vs Ashok Kumar Khanna on 27 February, 2018
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/99864603/
Court: Unknown
Date: Unknown

================================================================================

Delhi High Court
M.C. Luthra vs Ashok Kumar Khanna on 27 February, 2018
Author:
Valmiki J.Mehta
Bench:
Valmiki J.Mehta
*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         RFA No.780/2017
Reserved on: 20th February, 2018
%                               Pronounced on: 27th February, 2018
M.C. LUTHRA                                                 ..... Appellant
Through:       Mr. Rajesh Gogna, Advocate
with appellant in person.
versus
ASHOK KUMAR KHANNA                                      ..... Respondent
Through:                 Mr. Sakal Bhushan and Mr.
Akash Jandial, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
To be referred to the Reporter or not?         YES
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
1.           This Regular First Appeal under
Section 96
of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (
CPC
) is filed by the defendant in the suit
impugning the judgment of the Trial Court dated 9.6.2017 by which
trial court has decreed the suit for recovery of Rs.18 lacs filed by the
respondent/plaintiff for an amount of Rs.9 lacs with interest at 12%
per annum pendente lite and future. The counter-claim of the
appellant/defendant to forfeit the amount of Rs.9 lacs was dismissed
RFA No.780/2017                                               Page 1 of 43
by the impugned judgment. The amount decreed of Rs. 9 lacs is the
amount which was paid by the respondent/plaintiff to the
appellant/defendant/counter-claimant under the agreement to sell
dated 15.9.2005 entered into with respect to the property of the
appellant/defendant being Flat no. D504, Chanakya Cooperative
Society, Sector 4, Plot No.23, Dwarka, New Delhi.
2.           At the time of issuance of the notice in this appeal on
12.9.2017, the following order was passed and which shows that the
appellant/defendant/counter-claimant             contended          that       the
appellant/defendant should be held entitled to forfeit, if not the amount
of Rs.9 lacs decreed in favour of the respondent/plaintiff, then at least
the amount of Rs.3 lacs. This order dated 12.9.2017 reads as under:-
―C.M. Appl. No. 33138/2017 (for exemption)
Exemption allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
The application stands disposed of.
RFA 780/2017 and C.M. Appl. No. 33137/2017 (for stay)
1.       Learned counsel for the appellant argues that the entitlement of the
appellant/proposed seller, if not to forfeit the entire earnest money, was to
forfeit a reasonable part thereof once the respondent/plaintiff was guilty of
breach of contract, and which the respondent/plaintiff was in the facts of
the present case. It is accordingly argued that ordinarily in cases like the
present Court have allowed forfeiture of 10% of the price or lesser
depending on the facts of each case, and therefore, it is argued that in
the present case appellant is entitled to forfeit at least a sum of
Rs.3,00,000/- from the amount of Rs.9,00,000/- received by the appellant.
Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court in the case of
Fateh Chand Vs. Balkishan Dass
AIR 1963
SC 1405 to argue that forfeiture of earnest money is permitted provided
RFA No.780/2017                                                      Page 2 of 43
what is forfeited is the earnest money and not a part of the price with the
description of the amount received being immaterial but substance of the
actual payment having to be seen.
2.      In view of the arguments urged by counsel for the appellant, till
further orders unless varied by the Court and subject to the appellant
depositing a sum of Rs.6,00,000/- in this Court within a period of two
months from today there shall be stay of operation of the judgment and
decree dated 9.6.2017.
3.      Notice be issued to the respondent on filing of process fee, both in
the ordinary method as well as by registered AD post, returnable on 22 nd
January, 2018.‖
3.           Today counsel for the appellant/defendant/counter-
claimant has, in spite of what is recorded in the order dated 12.9.2017
of appellant/defendant restricting the claim of forfeiture to a
reasonable amount of Rs. 3 lacs out of Rs.9 lacs, argued by placing
reliance upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Satish
Batra Vs. Sudhir Rawal
(2013) 1 SCC 345 that since the amount of
Rs.9lacs    was      paid     by     the    respondent/plaintiff        to    the
appellant/defendant as earnest money, hence in accordance with the
ratio in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) the entire amount of Rs. 9
lacs can be forfeited by the appellant/defendant as permitted by Clause
8 of the agreement to sell. The impugned judgment of the trial court is
therefore prayed to be set aside and the counter-claim of the
appellant/defendant is prayed for being decreed for entitling the
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 3 of 43
appellant/defendant to forfeit the entire amount of Rs.9 lacs received
by the appellant/defendant from the respondent/plaintiff.
4.           There is no dispute between the parties that parties had
entered into an agreement to sell dated 15.9.2005 for the
appellant/defendant to sell the subject suit property to the
respondent/plaintiff. The total sale consideration was Rs.31.50 lacs
and it is not in dispute that at the time of entering into the agreement
to sell the appellant/defendant received an amount of Rs.9 lacs with
the amount of Rs.7 lacs being paid in terms of demand drafts and a
sum of Rs.2 lacs being paid in cash. Disputes and differences arose
between the parties as to who was guilty of breach of contract in not
performing     the    agreement      to    sell    dated     15.9.2005.
Respondent/plaintiff filed the subject suit pleading that the
appellant/defendant was guilty of breach of contract and that therefore
in terms of Clause 8 of the subject agreement to sell dated 15.9.2005,
the respondent/plaintiff was entitled from the appellant/defendant to
double the amount of the money paid of Rs.9 lacs i.e an amount of
Rs.18 lacs. The appellant/defendant prayed for the suit to be dismissed
and sought a declaration that the appellant/defendant should be held
RFA No.780/2017                                             Page 4 of 43
entitled to forfeit the amount paid of Rs.9 lacs received by
appellant/defendant under the agreement to sell, forfeiture being on
account of breach of contract by the respondent/plaintiff and as
permitted by Clause 8 of the agreement to sell.
5.           Trial court, after pleadings were complete, framed the
following issues:-
―1.    Whether the defendant had discharged his all the liabilities raised
against him by the concerned authority i.e. MCD/Society, bank by
the stipulated dated i.e. 18.11.2005. If not its effect? OPD
2.     Whether there is a cause of action in filing the present suit in
favour of the plaintiff? OPD
3.     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to double the amount of earnest
money as claimed in the plaint? OPP
4.     Whether the plaintiff was having sufficient funds available with
him to perform the agreement? OPP
5.     Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover the suit amount from the
defendant? OPP
6.     Whether the defendant is entitled to forfeit the earnest money as
claimed by defendant in the counter claim? OPD
7.     Relief.‖
6.           Trial court has by the impugned judgment held that none
of the parties are guilty of breach of contract. Trial court has held that
besides none of the parties being guilty of breach of contract, the
respondent/plaintiff is found to have filed the suit before the due date
fixed for performance as per the agreement to sell, and that therefore
the respondent/plaintiff cannot seek double the amount of earnest
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 5 of 43
money paid of Rs.9 lacs i.e the respondent/plaintiff's suit for the claim
of Rs.18 lacs will fail. Trial court however decreed the suit for a sum
of Rs.9 lacs being the amount paid under the agreement to sell by
holding that there cannot be forfeiture of the amount paid under an
agreement to sell because the amount of Rs.9 lacs paid under the
agreement to sell could not be categorized as earnest money. The
relevant paras of the impugned judgment also show that the trial court
has held that the appellant/defendant has failed to prove any loss on
account of the breach of contract and further that the amount received
of Rs.9 lacs is not earnest money under the contract because terms of
the agreement to sell did not indicate that this amount of Rs.9 lacs was
given as guarantee for due performance of the obligations. The
relevant observations of the trial court in this regard are contained in
paras 34 to 42 of the impugned judgment and these paras read as
under:-
―34. So far as counter claim of defendant for claiming that
earnest amount of plaintiff is liable to be forfeited, law is well settled. If
we go through the terms of the agreement Ex.PW1/1, stipulation in the
shape of Clause 8 regarding forfeiture of earnest money cannot be termed
as a penalty. Consequences for breach of the contract are provided in
Chapter VI of the Contract Act
which contains three sections, namely,
section 73
section 75
. As per
Section 73
of the Contract Act, the party
who suffers by the breach of contract is entitled to receive from the
defaulting party, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him by
such breach, which naturally arose in usual course of things
RFA No.780/2017                                                       Page 6 of 43
from such breach, or which the two parties knew when they make the
contract to be likely the result of the breach of contract. This provision
makes it clear that such compensation is not to be given for any remote or
indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach. The
underlying principle enshrined in this section is that a mere breach of
contract by a defaulting party would not entitle other side to claim
damages unless said party has in fact suffered damages because of such
breach. Loss or damage which is actually suffered as a result of breach has
to be proved and the plaintiff is to be compensated to the extent of actual
loss or damage suffered.
35.
Section 74
of the Act entitles a party to claim reasonable
compensation from the party who has broken the contract which
compensation can be pre-determined compensation stipulated at the time
of entering into the contract itself. Thus, this section provides for
pre-estimate of the damage or loss which a party is likely to suffer if the
other party breaks the contract entered into between the two of them.
Fateh Chand v. Balkishan Das
, 1964 (1) SCR 515, Supreme Court
has held: ―
Section 74
of the Indian Contract Act deals with the
measure of damages in two classes of cases (i) where the contract names a
sum to be paid in case of breach and (ii) where the contract
contains any other stipulation by way of penalty.
36.     We are in the present case not concerned to decide
whether a covenant of forfeiture of deposit for due performance of a
contract falls within the first class. The measure of damages in
the case of breach of a stipulation by way of penalty is by
Section 74
reasonable compensation not exceeding the penalty stipulated for. In
assessing damages the Court has, subject to the limit of the
penalty stipulated, jurisdiction to award such compensation as it deems
reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case. Jurisdiction
of the Court to award compensation in case of breach of contract is
unqualified except as to the maximum stipulated; but compensation
has to be reasonable, and that imposes upon the Court duty to
award compensation according to settled principles. The section
undoubtedly says that the aggrieved party is entitled to receive
compensation from the party who has broken the contract, whether or not
actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused by the breach.
Thereby it merely dispenses with proof of ―actual loss or damages‖; it
does not justify the award of compensation when in
consequence of the breach no legal injury at all has resulted,
because compensation for breach of contract can be awarded to make
good loss or damage which naturally arose in the usual course of things, or
which the parties knew when they made the contract, to be likely to result
from the breach.‖
37.      Thus,
section 74
of Contract Act declares the law as to liability
upon breach of contract where compensation is by agreement of the
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 7 of 43
parties pre-determined, or where there is a stipulation by way of penalty.
But the application of the enactment is not restricted to cases
where the aggrieved party claims relief as a plaintiff. The Section does
not confer a special benefit upon any party; it merely declares the law
that notwithstanding any term in the contract predetermining
damages or providing for forfeiture of any property by way of penalty,
the Court will award to the party aggrieved only reasonable
compensation not exceeding the amount named or penalty stipulated. The
Court has to adjudge in every case reasonable compensation to
which the plaintiff is entitled from the defendant on breach of the
contract. Such compensation has to be ascertained having regard to the
conditions existing on the date of the breach.
38.
Maula Bux v. Union of India (UOI
), 1970 (1) SCR 928, it
was held: ―Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for sale of
property -- movable or immovable --if the amount is reasonable, does
not fall within
Section 74
. That has been decided in several cases:
Kunwar Chiranjit Singh v. Har Swarup, A.I.R.1926 P.C.1;
Roshan
Lal v. The Delhi Cloth and General Mills Company Ltd., Delhi,
I.L.R. All.166
; Muhammad Habibullah v. Muhammad Shafi, I.L.R.
All.
324; Bishan Chand v. Radha Kishan Das, I.D. 19 All. 49. These
cases are easily explained, for forfeiture of a reasonable amount
paid as earnest money does not amount to imposing a penalty. But if
forfeiture is of the nature of penalty,
Section 74
applies. Where under the
terms of the contract the party in breach has undertaken to pay a sum of
money or to forfeit a sum of money which he has already paid to the party
complaining of a breach of contract, the undertaking is of the nature of a
penalty.‖
39.
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills and Others v. Tata Air Craft
Limited
, 1969 (3) SCC 522, Apex Court elaborately discussed the
principles which emerged from the expression ―earnest money‖. Apex
Court, considering the scope of the term ―earnest‖, laid down
certain principles, which are as follows:
―From a review of the decisions cited above, the following principles
emerge regarding ―earnest‖
(1) It must be given at the moment at which the contract is concluded.
(2) It represents a guarantee that the contract will be fulfilled or, in
other words, ―earnest‖ is given to bind the contract.
(3) It is part of the purchase price when the transaction is carried out.
(4) It is forfeited when the transaction falls through by reason
of the default or failure of the purchaser.
(5) Unless there is anything to the contrary in the terms of the contract,
on default committed by the buyer, the seller is entitled to forfeit the
earnest.‖
40.
Delhi          Development         Authority v. Grihstrapana
Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd.
, 1995 (1) SCC (Suppl.) 751,
RFA No.780/2017                                                       Page 8 of 43
Apex Court held that the forfeiture of the earnest money was legal.
V. Lakshmanan v. B.R. Mangalgiri and Others
, 1995 (2) SCC
(Suppl.) 33, Supreme Court held as follows:
―The question then is whether the respondents are entitled to forfeit the
entire amount. It is seen that a specific covenant under the
contract was that respondents are entitled to forfeit the money paid
under the contract. So when the contract fell through by the default
committed by the appellant, as part of the contract, they are
entitled to forfeit the entire amount.‖
41.      Law is, therefore, clear that to justify the forfeiture of advance
money being part of ‗earnest money' the terms of the contract should be
clear and explicit. earnest money is paid or given at the time when the
contract is entered into and, as a pledge for its due performance
by the depositor to be forfeited in case of non-performance, by the
depositor. There can be converse situation also that if the seller fails to
perform the contract the purchaser can also get the double the amount, if it
is so stipulated. It is also the law that part payment of purchase price
cannot be forfeited unless it is a guarantee for the due performance of the
contract. In other words, if the payment is made only towards part
payment of consideration and not intended as earnest money then the
forfeiture clause will not apply.
42.       In view of the legal proposition as discussed above, in facts and
circumstances of the case while I have already held that both the parties
cannot be held guilty for non compliance of terms of agreement, therefore,
defendant to my mind is also not entitled for forfeiture of entire earnest
amount. In peculiar facts and circumstances of the case while I decide
the issue no. 1 that defendant has discharged all his liabilities,
therefore, plaintiff is not entitled for double of the amount as claimed.
Therefore, plaintiff to my mind is entitled for recovery of only Rs.9 lacs
admittedly paid by him to defendant as earnest money however, plaintiff is
entitled for such recovery of amount with interest @12 % from the date of
filing of the suit till realization. Above said issues are being
accordingly decided.‖                                   (underlining added)
7.           Before this Court on behalf of the respondent/plaintiff it
is argued that even if respondent/plaintiff is held to be guilty of breach
of contract, but since no loss is pleaded and proved by the
appellant/defendant to have been suffered by him on account of the
RFA No.780/2017                                                       Page 9 of 43
breach of contract by the respondent/plaintiff, therefore the
appellant/defendant cannot forfeit the entire amount of Rs.9 lacs and
that the appellant/defendant can forfeit only a nominal amount or a
reasonable amount out of the total amount received by the
appellant/defendant of Rs.9 lacs. Reliance is placed by the counsel for
the respondent/plaintiff upon the Constitution Bench judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of
Fateh Chand Vs. Balkishan Dass
AIR
1963 SC 1405.
Reliance is also placed by the counsel for the
respondent/plaintiff upon a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in
the case of
Kailash Nath Associates Vs. Delhi Development
Authority and Another
(2015) 4 SCC 136 to argue that Supreme
Court in this judgment of
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra) has
clarified with reference to the ratio of
Fateh Chand
's case (supra) that
when what is forfeited pursuant to a clause in a contract being an
agreement to sell then that act of forfeiture is one falling under
Section
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and that
Section 74
of the
Contract Act would only apply if the contract is of such a nature that
loss cannot be proved on account of breach of contract but if the loss
can be proved then it/loss must be proved failing which earnest money
RFA No.780/2017                                             Page 10 of 43
cannot be forfeited.
Putting it in other words it is argued that it is held
by the Supreme Court in the case of
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra)
that on forfeiture being effected of earnest moneys paid under the
contract, the said act of forfeiture is an act which falls under
Section
of the Contract Act because forfeiture is taking place of a
liquidated amount fixed as per the contract between the parties, but
eventuality of such a clause of forfeiture coming into application
would only be where contract is such by its nature that the loss cannot
be proved; unlike those contracts where it is possible to prove the loss
caused; and that breach of an agreement to sell/purchase of immovable
property is a type of contract where loss can be proved, and that once
loss is not pleaded and proved to be caused to the appellant/defendant,
then earnest money amount cannot be forfeited. It is also argued on
behalf of the respondent/plaintiff that amount of forfeiture if results in
forfeiture taking place then if the forfeited amount is in the nature of a
penalty amount, then the Courts will not allow forfeiture of the
liquidated amount/earnest money which is in the nature of penalty and
that Courts will only grant reasonable compensation lesser than the
total amount of earnest money which is a penalty amount.
RFA No.780/2017                                              Page 11 of 43
8.           The issue before this Court is that whether it is the ratio
of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) which has to be applied or it is the ratio of the judgments of
the Supreme Court in the cases of
Fateh Chand
(supra) and
Kailash
Nath Associates
(supra) which have to be applied.
Also, if the ratio
in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) applies, then it is to be decided to
what extent can the appellant/defendant be held entitled to forfeit the
amount i.e whether appellant/defendant can forfeit the entire amount
of Rs.9 lacs or only a lesser amount can be allowed to be forfeited by
the appellant/defendant, and what is that lesser amount.
9.           The facts of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of
Satish Batra
(supra) are quite similar to the facts of the
present case because in the said case the Hon'ble Supreme Court was
dealing with a fact situation as to whether when a contract being an
agreement to sell contains a clause of forfeiture then in such cases the
seller on breach by the buyer under an agreement to sell is entitled to
forfeit the amount of earnest money simply because a clause of
forfeiture is so provided under the agreement to sell.
Supreme Court
in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) on account of a clause of forfeiture
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 12 of 43
existing in the agreement to sell
in that case
allowed forfeiture of an
amount of Rs.7 lacs out of the total sale consideration of Rs.70 lacs i.e
10% of the amount received under the agreement to sell was held to be
in the nature of earnest money being capable of forfeiture by the seller
because the clause in the agreement to sell so provided for.
Supreme
Court in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) distinguished the judgment
of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of
Fateh
Chand
(supra) and relied upon the subsequent judgments of the
Supreme Court in the cases of
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills and
Others Vs. Tata Air Craft Limited
1969) 3 SCC 522 and Videocon
Properties Ltd. Vs. Dr. Bhalchandra Laboratories and Others
(2004)
3 SCC 711 for holding that the earnest money in an agreement to sell
can always be forfeited without pleading and proving any requirement
of the seller having suffered any loss.
The relevant paras of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) are
paras 5 and 8 to 17 and these paras read as under:-
―5.     We have heard the learned Counsel on either side at length. Facts
are undisputed. The only question is whether the seller is entitled to retain
the entire amount of Rs. 7,00,000/- received towards earnest money or not.
The fact that the purchaser was at fault in not paying the balance
consideration of Rs. 63,00,000/- is also not disputed. The question whether
the seller can retain the entire amount of earnest money depends upon the
terms of the agreement. Relevant clause of the Agreement for Sale dated
29.11.2005 is extracted hereunder for easy reference:
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 13 of 43
"e) If the prospective purchaser fail to fulfill the above condition. The
transaction shall stand cancelled and earnest money will be forfeited.
In case I fail to complete the transaction as stipulated above. The
purchaser will get the DOUBLE amount of the earnest money. In the
both condition, DEALER will get 4% Commission from the faulting
party."
The clause, therefore, stipulates that if the purchaser fails to fulfill the
conditions mentioned in the agreement, the transaction shall stand
cancelled and earnest money will be forfeited. On the other hand, if the
seller fails to complete the transaction, the purchaser would get double the
amount of earnest money. Undisputedly the purchaser failed to perform his
part of the contract, then the question is whether the seller can forfeit the
entire earnest money.
xxxxx                 xxxxx                   xxxxx
8.       We are of the view that the High Court has completely
misunderstood the dictum
laid down in
the above mentioned judgment in
Fateh Chand
Case and came to a wrong conclusion of law for more than
one reason, which will be more evident when we scan through the
subsequent judgments of this Court.
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills v. Tata Air Craft Limited
, this
Court elaborately discussed the principles which emerged from the
expression "earnest money". That was a case where the Appellant therein
entered into a contract with the Respondent for purchase of aero scrap.
According to the contract, the buyer had to deposit with the company 25%
of the total amount and that deposit was to remain with the company as the
earnest money to be adjusted in the final bills. Buyer was bound to pay the
full value less the deposit before taking delivery of the stores. In case of
default by the buyer, the company was entitled to forfeit unconditionally
the earnest money paid by the buyer and cancel the contract. The
Appellant advanced a sum of Rs. 25,000/- (being 25% of the total amount)
agreeing to pay the balance in two installments. On Appellant's failure to
pay any further amount, Respondent forfeited the sum of Rs. 25,000/-,
which according to it, was earnest money and cancelled the contract.
Appellant filed a suit for recovery of the said amount.
―The trial Court held that the sum was paid by way of deposit or
earnest money which was primarily a security for the performance of
the contract and that the Respondent was entitled to forfeit the deposit
amount when the Appellant committed a breach of the contract and
dismissed the suit."
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills
case)
The High Court confirmed the decision taken by the trial Court.
This
Court, considering the scope of the term "earnest", laid down certain
principles, which are as follows: (
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills
case)
―21. From a review of the decisions cited above, the following
principles emerge regarding "earnest"
(1) It must be given at the moment at which the contract is concluded.
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 14 of 43
(2) It represents a guarantee that the contract will be fulfilled or, in
other words, "earnest" is given to bind the contract.
(3) It is part of the purchase price when the transaction is carried out.
(4) It is forfeited when the transaction falls through by reason of the
default or failure of the purchaser.
(5) Unless there is anything to the contrary in the terms of the contract,
on default committed by the buyer, the seller is entitled to forfeit the
earnest.‖
10.
Delhi Development Authority v. Grihstrapana Cooperative
Group Housing Society Ltd.
, this Court following the judgment of the
Privy Council in Har Swaroop and Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills, held that
the forfeiture of the earnest money was legal.
V. Lakshmanan v. B.R.
Mangalgiri
, this Court held as follows:
―5.The question then is whether the Respondents are entitled to forfeit
the entire amount. It is seen that a specific covenant under the contract
was that Respondents are entitled to forfeit the money paid under the
contract. So when the contract fell through by the default committed by
the Appellant, as part of the contract, they are entitled to forfeit the
entire amount.
11.      In HUDA v. Kewal Krishan Goel, the question that came up for
consideration before this Court was, where a land is allotted, the allottee
deposited some installments but thereafter intimated the authority about
his incapacity to pay up the balance installments and requested for refund
of the money paid, was the allotting authority entitled to forfeit the earnest
money deposited by the allottee or could be only entitled to forfeit 10% of
the total amount deposited by the allottee till the request is made?
Following the judgment in Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills, this Court held
that‖ (Huda case)
―12. ... the allottee having accepted the allotment and having made
some payment on installments basis, then made a request to surrender
the land, has committed default on his part and, therefore, the
competent authority would be fully justified in forfeiting the earnest
money which had been deposited and not the 10% of the amount
deposited, as held by the High Court."
In that case, this Court took the view that the earnest money represented
the guarantee that the contract would be fulfilled.
12.     This Court, again, in
Videocon Properties Ltd. v. Bhalchandra
Laboratories
, dealt with a case of sale of immovable property. It was a
case where the Plaintiff-Appellants had entered into an agreement with the
Respondents-Defendants on 13.5.1994 to sell the landed property owned
by the Respondents and a sum of Rs. 38,00,000/- was paid by the
Appellants as deposit or earnest money on the execution of the agreement.
In that case, this Court examined the nature and character of the earnest
money deposit and took the view that the words used in the agreement
alone would not be determinative of the character of the "earnest money"
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 15 of 43
but really the intention of the parties and surrounding circumstances. The
Court held that the earnest money serves two purposes of being part-
payment of the purchase money and security for the performance of the
contract by the party concerned.
13.
In that case, on facts, after interpreting various clauses of the
agreement, the Court held as follows:(
Bhalchandra
case)
―15. Coming to the facts of the case, it is seen from the agreement
dated 13.5.1994 entered into between parties - particularly Clause 1,
which specifies more than one enumerated categories of payment to be
made by the purchaser in the manner and at stages indicated therein, as
consideration for the ultimate sale to be made and completed. The
further fact that the sum of Rs. 38 lakhs had to be paid on the date of
execution of the agreement itself, with the other remaining categories
of sums being stipulated for payment at different and subsequent stages
as well as execution of the sale deed by the Vendors taken together
with the contents of the stipulation made in Clause 2.3, providing for
the return of it, if for any reason the Vendors fail to fulfill their
obligations under Clause 2, strongly supports and strengthens the claim
of the Appellants that the intention of the parties in the case on hand is
in effect to treat the sum of Rs. 38 lakhs to be part of the prepaid
purchase-money and not pure and simple earnest money deposit of the
restricted sense and tenor, wholly unrelated to the purchase price as
such in any manner. The mention made in the agreement or description
of the same otherwise as "deposit or earnest money" and not merely as
earnest money, inevitably leads to the inescapable conclusion that the
same has to and was really meant to serve both purposes as envisaged
in the decision noticed supra. In substance, it is, therefore, really a
deposit or payment of advance as well and for that matter actually part
payment of purchase price, only. In the teeth of the further fact
situation that the sale could not be completed by execution of the sale
deed in this case only due to lapses and inabilities on the part of the
Respondents - irrespective of bonafides or otherwise involved in such
delay and lapses, the amount of rupees 38 lakhs becomes refundable by
the Vendors to the purchasers as of the prepaid purchase price
deposited with the Vendors. Consequently, the sum of rupees 38 lakhs
to be refunded would attract the first limb or part of
Section 55(6)(b)
the Transfer of Property Act itself and therefore necessarily, as held by
the learned Single Judge, the Defendants prima facie became liable to
refund the same with interest due thereon, in terms of Clause 2.3 of the
agreement Therefore, the statutory charge envisaged therein would get
attracted to and encompass the whole of the sum of rupees 38 lakhs
and the interest due thereon.‖
14.      In the above mentioned case, the Court also held as follows:
Bhalchandra
case)
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 16 of 43
―14. ...Further, it is not the description by words used in the agreement
only that would be determinative of the character of the sum but really
the intention of parties and surrounding circumstances as well, that
have to be baked into and what may be called an advance may really
be a deposit or earnest money and what is termed as 'a deposit or
earnest money' may ultimately turn out to be really an advance or part
of purchase price. Earnest money or deposit also, thus, serves two
purposes of being part payment of the purchase money and security for
the performances of the contract by the party concerned, who paid it.‖
15.     The law is, therefore, clear that to justify the forfeiture of advance
money being part of 'earnest money' the terms of the contract should be
clear and explicit. Earnest money is paid or given at the time when the
contract is entered into and, as a pledge for its due performance by the
depositor to be forfeited in case of non-performance, by the depositor.
There can be converse situation also that if the seller fails to perform the
contract the purchaser can also get the double the amount, if it is so
stipulated. It is also the law that part payment of purchase price cannot be
forfeited unless it is a guarantee for the due performance of the contract. In
other words, if the payment is made only towards part payment of
consideration and not intended as earnest money then the forfeiture clause
will not apply.
16.     When we examine the clauses in the instant case, it is amply clear
that the clause extracted hereinabove was included in the contract at the
moment at which the contract was entered into. It represents the guarantee
that the contract would be fulfilled. In other words, 'earnest' is given to
bind the contract, which is a part of the purchase price when the
transaction is carried out and it will be forfeited when the transaction falls
through by reason of the default or failure of the purchaser. There is no
other clause militates against the clauses extracted in the agreement dated
29.11.2011.
17.     We are, therefore, of the view that the seller was justified in
forfeiting the amount of Rs. 7,00,000/- as per the relevant clause, since the
earnest money was primarily a security for the due performance of the
agreement and, consequently, the seller is entitled to forfeit the entire
deposit. The High Court has, therefore, committed an error in reversing the
judgment of the trial court.‖
10.          A reference to aforesaid paras of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) shows that there
was a clause in the agreement to sell which was held by the Supreme
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 17 of 43
Court to entitle forfeiture of earnest money, and this clause was as is
reproduced in Para 5 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
Satish Batra
(supra), and therefore in the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) it was held that earnest money paid under an agreement to sell
can be forfeited without complying with the requirement of the seller
pleading and proving that he has suffered a loss on account of breach
of the agreement to sell by the buyer.
It also needs to be noted that in
Para 14 of the case of
Satish Batra
(supra) reference is made to the
ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Videocon
Properties Ltd.
's (supra) that words used in an agreement are not
determinative of the character of the sum (received by a seller under
an agreement to sell) and what is the character of the amount paid
depends upon the intentions of the parties and the surrounding
circumstances. The Supreme Court therefore held that whether or not
an amount called as earnest money under the contract is or is not
earnest money will have to be decided as per the facts and
circumstances of each individual case.
11.          In the present case, the Agreement to Sell (Ex.PW1/1)
entered into between the parties reads as under:-
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 18 of 43
―               AGREEMENT TO SELL AND PURCHASE
This agreement is executed at Delhi, on this 15/09/2005
BETWEEN
Sh. M.C. Luthra s/o Sh. Mangal Das Luthra R/o H. No.691, Sector-V R.K.
Puram, New Delhi
(hereinafter called the PARTY NO.1)
AND
Sh. Ashok Kumar Khanna S/o Sh. Sant Ram Khanna R/o D-32, Fateh
Nagar, New Delhi
(hereinafter called the PARTY NO.2)
The expression of both the Parties wherever they occur in the body
of this agreement shall means, and include their respective heirs, legal
representative, administrators, executors, successors, and assigns.
Whereas the Party No.1 is the exclusive owner of Flat No.D-504
Chankaya Cooperative Group Housing Society, Sector-4, Plot No.23
Dwarka, New Delhi.
The aforesaid property is free from all kind encumbrances such as
prior sale gifts, mortgage, litigation, disputes, stay orders, attachments,
notifications, acquisitions, charges liens, sureties etc.
Whereas the party No.1 for his bonafide needs and requirements
has agreed to sell the aforesaid property for a total sale consideration of
Rs.31,50,000/- (Rupees Thirty one lakhs & Fifty Thousands only) and
Party No.2 has agreed to purchase the same on the following terms and
conditions of this agreement:-
NOW THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH AS UNDER:-
1.       That the Party No.2 has paid an amount of Rs.7,00,000/- (Rupees
Seven Lakhs on 15.9.2005) as earnest money and balance amount of Rs.
2,00,000/- (Rs. Two lakhs only) will be paid by 23.9.2005.
2.       The balance sale consideration amount of Rs.22,50,000/- (Rupees
Twenty two lakhs and fifty thousands only) will be paid latest by
18/11/2005 (18th November 2005)
3.       All liabilities up to the date of finalization of deal will be paid by
Party No.1 and the same will be paid by Party No.2 after finalization of
the deal.
4.       That the Party No.1 shall not create any charges over the said
property after the execution of this agreement and Party No.1 has no right
to sell it to anybody else after the signing of this agreement.
5.       That all the expenditure regarding registration shall be borne by the
Party No.2.
7.       That the Party No.1 will deliver the vacant physical possession of
the said property at the time of full and final payment and registration of
concerned documents in favour of the purchaser.
8.       If the Party No.1 could not execute this agreement to sell then the
Party No.1 will pay the double amount of the earnest money to Party No.2
RFA No.780/2017                                                      Page 19 of 43
and if Party No.2 fails to pay the balance consideration amount within the
due date then the amount of earnest money will be forfeited by Party No.1.
9.      That Party No.1 has given his/her/their consent to the above
condition without any reservation.
10.     That Party No.2 hereby, further confirms and declares that this
agreement is IRREVOCABLE and shall be final and binding on them,
their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns.
11.     That both the parties will pay a commission of NIL% each to M/s
xxx
IN WITNESS WHEREOF BOTH THE PARTIES HAVE PUT
THEIR RESPECTIVE HANDS ON THIS AGREEMENT IN PRESENCE
OF THE FOLLOWING WITNESSES:-
WITNESSES:-                                                 sd/-
1. sd/-                                              Party No.1 (SELLER)
2. sd/-                                                  sd/-
PartyNo.2 (PURCHASER)‖
(emphasis added)
12.(i)          Clause 8 of the agreement to sell in the present case
entitling forfeiture of earnest money is no doubt similar to the clause
which existed in
Satish Batra
's case (supra), however a reference to
Clause 1 of the agreement to sell shows that earnest money is only
Rs.7,00,000/- and not Rs.9,00,000/-. It is only Rs.7,00,000/- which is
stated as earnest money in Clause 1 of the agreement to sell and with
respect to the other amount of Rs.2,00,000/- it is stated that this is the
'balance amount'. Clause 2 of the agreement to sell then states that the
'balance sale consideration' amount would be Rs.22,50,000/- i.e parties
understood that in case the agreement to sell goes through then what
has been paid in terms of Clause 1 of the agreement to sell of
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 20 of 43
Rs.7,00,000/- as earnest money will become part of the price to be
paid under the agreement to sell.
(ii)     Therefore in my opinion in the facts of the present case
appellant/defendant cannot contend that earnest money amount was
Rs.9,00,000/- and therefore this Court holds that the earnest amount is
Rs.7,00,000/-.
13.(i)        The issue to be decided then is that how much amount
should the appellant/defendant be held entitled to forfeit. As already
stated above in
Satish Batra
's case (supra) besides holding that what
is earnest money depends on facts and circumstances of each case, and
Satish Batra
's case (supra) ten percent of the total sale
consideration being Rs.7 lacs was held in terms of the contractual
clause to be entitled for being forfeited as earnest money as in
Satish
Batra
's case (supra) the sale consideration was Rs.70,00,000/-. When
we see the facts of the present case it is seen that the total sale
consideration is Rs.31,50,000/- and ten percent of which amount
would therefore come to Rs.3,15,000/-.
As already observed in
Satish
Batra
's case (supra) by referring to the ratio of
Videocon Properties
Ltd.
's case (supra) that merely because the amount is called as earnest
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 21 of 43
money it will not automatically become earnest money and what is to
be taken as the earnest money amount will depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case with the intentions of the parties.
(ii)   With respect to the amount being called as earnest money and
whether merely by that itself that the amount is called as earnest
money it will become earnest money, it is seen that what is material is
not label of the amount but the substance which has to be seen in view
of the observations made in Para 14 of the judgment of the Supreme
Court in
Videocon Properties Ltd.
's case (supra), which has been
reproduced above.
I have also in the judgment in the case of
Shri
Sunil Sehgal vs. Shri Chander Batra and Others
, CS(OS) No.
1250/2006 decided on 23.9.2015 similarly held and have observed as
under:-
"9.    In the present case, defendants have led no evidence of any loss
caused to them, and therefore, assuming that plaintiff is guilty of breach of
contract, yet, the defendants cannot forfeit the amount of Rs.15 lacs lying
with them. A huge amount of Rs.15 lacs out of the total sale consideration
of Rs.79,50,000/- cannot in law be called earnest money. By giving a
stamp of ‗earnest money' to advance price, the latter cannot become the
former. What is to be seen is the substance and not the label. Only a
nominal amount can be said to be earnest money and not an amount of
Rs.15 lacs out of Rs.79.50 lacs, by noting that if suppose an amount of Rs.
30 lacs or 40 lacs would be called as earnest money by the parties, that
would not take away the fact that such amount cannot be earnest money
but would in fact be part of the price to be paid for sale."
(underlining added)
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 22 of 43
(iii)   I have also similarly held in the judgment passed in the case of
Bhuley Singh Vs. Khazan Singh & Ors.
in RFA No. 422/2011
decided on 9.11.2011 and the relevant Para 5 of the judgment reads as
under:-
"5.      In my opinion, the appeal deserves to be allowed as the
appellant/plaintiff has rightly claimed a lesser relief of Rs.5,00,000/-
instead of a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- as claimed in the plaint and which he is
surely entitled to under Order 7(7)
CPC
. The Trial Court had framed a
specific issue being issue no.2 as to whether plaintiff was entitled to
recover Rs.5,00,000/- from the respondents/defendants paid against the
receipt dated 5.1.2007 and therefore the argument of the counsel for the
respondents/defendants that no issue was framed has no force. Once there
was a specific issue, this issue could well have been urged so that the
appellant/plaintiff could claim a sum of Rs.5,00,000/- from the
respondents/defendants which was paid under the agreement to sell as an
earnest amount on the basis of the undisputed position that the
respondents/defendants did not plead or prove that loss had been caused to
them so as to entitle them to forfeit the amount paid to them under the
Agreement to Sell. The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the
case of
Fateh Chand
(supra) makes it more than clear that a mere breach
of contract by a buyer does not entitle the seller to forfeit the amount as
received, unless, loss is proved to have been caused to the prospective
sellers/defendants/respondents.
The Supreme Court in the judgment of
Fateh Chand
(supra) allowed forfeiture of amount of Rs.1,000/- out of the
amount paid of Rs.25,000/-. I may also note that nomenclature of a
payment is not important and what is important is really the quantum of
price which is paid.
In the present case, the total price payable for the suit
property is Rs.20,00,000/- and therefore 25% of the payment made stricto
sensu cannot be an earnest money, though it has been called so. Only a
nominal amount can be an earnest money, inasmuch as, the object of such
a clause is to allow forfeiture of that amount to a nominal extent as held in
the case of
Fateh Chand
(supra). For example can it be said that 100% of
the price or 75%/80% of the price or 50% of the price is earnest money so
that it can be forfeited. The answer surely is in the negative. Such high
amounts called earnest money will be in the nature of penalty and thus hit
Section 74
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 in view of Fateh Chand's
case.
The principles
laid down in
Fateh Chand
's case; that forfeiture of a
reasonable amount is not penalty but if forfeiture is of a large amount the
same is in the nature of penalty attracting the applicability of
Section 74
have been recently reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of
RFA No.780/2017                                                       Page 23 of 43
V.K.Ashokan vs. CCE
, 2009 (14) SCC 85."
(underlining added)
I therefore hold that the appellant/defendant can at best seek to
forfeit, in accordance with the ratio in
Satish Batra
's case (supra), a
sum of Rs. 3 lacs, and not a sum of Rs. 9 lacs as is claimed by the
appellant/defendant, but even this amount of Rs. 3 lacs cannot be
allowed to be forfeited and the reasons are given hereinafter.
14.          At this stage this Court would like to observe with all
humility that there are apparently two views which the Supreme Court
has taken in its line of cases as regards entitlement to forfeit earnest
moneys. Whereas one view is the view which is the view taken by no
less than a Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Fateh Chand Vs. Balkishan Dass AIR 1963 SC 1405 that
forfeiture of earnest money can only be of a nominal amount, and
which was a sum of Rs. 1,000/- out of the total sale price of Rs.
1,12,500/- in
Fateh Chand
's case (supra), and that Supreme Court in
this judgment has laid down the ratio that whenever a seller forfeits an
amount paid by a buyer under an agreement to sell then the source of
right of forfeiture arises only because of
Section 74
of the Contract
Act.
It is held in
Fateh Chand
's case (supra) that where a seller
RFA No.780/2017                                            Page 24 of 43
pleads that there is a breach of contract by the buyer and the seller
seeks to forfeit an amount as paid by the buyer for being appropriated
as designated liquidated loss amount of damages as per contractual
clause, then the act of forfeiture is one which falls under
Section 74
the Contract Act. Forfeiture of an amount paid under the agreement is
by a seller who already has with him moneys in his pocket and
therefore there is no requirement to file a suit to recover any amount
from the buyer, however the law with respect to entitlement of
forfeiture arises only because the forfeited amount is liquidated
damages under
Section 74
of the Contract Act.
That the forfeiture of
earnest money is nothing but forfeiture of liquidated damages is
clearly so clarified by the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of
Kailash Nath Associates Vs. Delhi Development Authority
and Another
, (2015) 4 SCC 136 and relevant paras of this judgment
are paras 30 to 44 which read as under:-
30.     We now come to the reasoning which involves
Section 74
of the
Contract Act. The Division Bench held:
"38. The learned Single Judge has held that the property was
ultimately auctioned in the year 1994 at a price which fetched DDA a
handsome return of Rupees 11.78 crores and there being no damages
suffered by DDA, it could not forfeit the earnest money
39. The said view runs in the teeth of the decision of the Supreme
Court reported as AIR 1970 SC 1986 Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills &
Anr. V. Tata Aircraft Ltd. which holds that as against an amount
RFA No.780/2017                                                Page 25 of 43
tendered by way of security, amount tendered as earnest money could
be forfeited as per terms of the contract.
40. We may additionally observe that original time to pay the balance
bid consideration, as per Ex.P-I was May 18, 1982 and as extended by
Ex. P-8 was October 28, 1982. That DDA could auction the plot in the
year 1994 in the sum of Rupees 11.78 crore was immaterial and not
relevant evidence for the reason damages with respect to the price of
property have to be computed with reference to the date of the breach
of the contract."
31.
Section 74
as it originally stood read thus:
"When a contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the contract
as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, the party complaining
of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damage or loss is
proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who has
broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the
amount so named."
32.     By an amendment made in 1899, the Section was amended to read:
―74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated
for.-- When a contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the
contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the
contract contains any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party
complaining of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damage or
loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party
who has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding
the amount so named or, as the case may be, the penalty stipulated for.
Explanation.--A stipulation for increased interest from the date of
default may be a stipulation by way of penalty.
Exception.--When any person enters into any bail-bond, recognizance
or other instrument of the same nature, or, under the provisions of any
law, or under the orders of the Central Government or of any State
Government, gives any bond for the performance of any public duty or
act in which the public are interested, he shall be liable, upon breach of
any condition of any such instrument, to pay the whole sum mentioned
therein.
Explanation.--A person who enters into a contract with Government
does not necessarily thereby undertake any public duty, or promise to
do an act in which the public are interested.‖
33.
Section 74
occurs in Chapter 6 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
which reads ―Of the consequences of breach of contract‖. It is in fact
sandwiched between
Sections 73
and
which deal with compensation for
loss or damage caused by breach of contract and compensation for damage
which a party may sustain through nonfulfillment of a contract after such
party rightfully rescinds such contract. It is important to note that like
Sections 73
and
, compensation is payable for breach of contract under
Section 74
only where damage or loss is caused by such breach.
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 26 of 43
34.
Fateh Chand v. Balkishan Das
, 1964 SCR (1) 515, this Court
held:
"The section is clearly an attempt to eliminate the somewhat elaborate
refinements made under the English common law in distinguishing
between stipulations providing for payment of liquidated damages and
stipulations in the nature of penalty. Under the common law a genuine
pre-estimate of damages by mutual agreement is regarded as a
stipulation naming liquidated damages and binding between the
parties: a stipulation in a contract in terrorem is a penalty and the
Court refuses to enforce it, awarding to the aggrieved party only
reasonable compensation. The Indian Legislature has sought to cut
across the web of rules and presumptions under the English common
law, by enacting a uniform principle applicable to all stipulations
naming amounts to be paid in case of breach, and stipulations by way
of penalty. ....
Section 74
of the Indian Contract Act deals with the measure of
damages in two classes of cases (i) where the contract names a sum to
be paid in case of breach and (ii) where the contract contains any
other stipulation by way of penalty. We are in the present case not
concerned to decide whether a covenant of forfeiture of deposit for due
performance of a contract falls within the first class. The measure of
damages in the case of breach of a stipulation by way of penalty is by
Section 74
reasonable compensation not exceeding the penalty
stipulated for. In assessing damages the Court has, subject to the limit
of the penalty stipulated, jurisdiction to award such compensation as it
deems reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
Jurisdiction of the Court to award compensation in case of breach of
contract is unqualified except as to the maximum stipulated; but
compensation has to be reasonable, and that imposes upon the Court
duty to award compensation according to settled principles. The
section undoubtedly says that the aggrieved party is entitled to receive
compensation from the party who has broken the contract, whether or
not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused by the breach.
Thereby it merely dispenses with proof of "actual loss or
damages"; it does not justify the award of compensation when in
consequence of the breach no legal injury at all has resulted,
because compensation for breach of contract can be awarded to
make good loss or damage which naturally arose in the usual
course of things, or which the parties knew when they made the
contract, to be likely to result from the breach."(At page 526, 527)
Section 74
declares the law as to liability upon breach of contract
where compensation is by agreement of the parties pre-determined, or
where there is a stipulation by way of penalty. But the application of
the enactment is not restricted to cases where the aggrieved party
claims relief as a plaintiff. The section does not confer a special benefit
RFA No.780/2017                                                      Page 27 of 43
upon any party; it merely declares the law that notwithstanding any
term in the contract predetermining damages or providing for
forfeiture of any property by way of penalty, the court will award to the
party aggrieved only reasonable compensation not exceeding the
amount named or penalty stipulated. The jurisdiction of the court is not
determined by the accidental circumstance of the party in default being
a plaintiff or a defendant in a suit. Use of the expression "to receive
from the party who has broken the contract" does not predicate that
the jurisdiction of the court to adjust amounts which have been paid
by the party in default cannot be exercised in dealing with the claim
of the party complaining of breach of contract. The court has to
adjudge in every case reasonable compensation to which the plaintiff
is entitled from the defendant on breach of the contract. Such
compensation has to be ascertained having regard to the conditions
existing on the date of the breach."(At page 530)
35.     Similarly, in
Maula Bux v. Union of India (UOI
), 1970 (1) SCR
928, it was held:
"Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for sale of property-
movable or immovable-if the amount is reasonable, does not fall within
Section 74
. That has been decided in several cases :Kunwar Chiranjit
Singh v. Har Swarup, A.I.R.1926 P.C.1;
Roshan Lal v. The Delhi Cloth
and General Mills Company Ltd., Delhi, I.L.R. All.166
; Muhammad
Habibullah v. Muhammad Shafi, I.L.R. All.
324; Bishan Chand v.
Radha Kishan Das, I.D. 19 All. 49. These cases are easily explained,
for forfeiture of a reasonable amount paid as earnest money does not
amount to imposing a penalty. But if forfeiture is of the nature of
penalty,
Section 74
applies. Where under the terms of the contract the
party in breach has undertaken to pay a sum of money or to forfeit a
sum of money which he has already paid to the party complaining of a
breach of contract, the undertaking is of the nature of a penalty.
Counsel for the Union, however, urged that in the present case Rs.
10,000/- in respect of the potato contract and Rs. 8,500 in respect of
the poultry contract were genuine pre-estimates of damages which the
Union was likely to suffer as a result of breach of contract, and the
plaintiff was not entitled to any relief against forfeiture. Reliance in
support of this contention was placed upon the expression (used in
Section 74
of the Contract Act), "the party complaining of the breach is
entitled, whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been
caused thereby, to receive from the party who has broken the contract
reasonable compensation". It is true that in every case of breach of
contract the person aggrieved by the breach is not required to prove
actual loss or damage suffered by him before he can claim a decree,
and the Court is competent to award reasonable compensation in case
of breach even if no actual damage is proved to have been suffered in
consequence of the breach of contract. But the expression "whether or
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 28 of 43
not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby" is
intended to cover different classes of contracts which come before the
Courts. In case of breach of some contracts it may be impossible for
the Court to assess compensation arising from breach, while in other
cases compensation can be calculated in accordance with established
rules. Where the Court is unable to assess the compensation, the sum
named by the parties if it be regarded as a genuine pre-estimate may
be taken into consideration as the measure of reasonable
compensation, but not if the sum named is in the nature of a penalty.
Where loss in terms of money can be determined, the party claiming
compensation must prove the loss suffered by him.
In the present case, it was possible for the Government of India to lead
evidence to prove the rates at which potatoes, poultry, eggs and fish
were purchased by them when the plaintiff failed to deliver "regularly
and fully" the quantities stipulated under the terms of the contracts and
after the contracts were terminated. They could have proved the rates
at which they had to be purchased and also the other incidental
charges incurred by them in procuring the goods contracted for. But
no such attempt was made."(At page 933,934)
36.
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills and Anr. v. Tata Aircraft
Limited
, 1970 (3) SCR 127 it was held:
"From a review of the decisions cited above, the following principles
emerge regarding "earnest":
(1) It must be given at the moment at which the contract is concluded
(2) It represents a guarantee that the contract will be fulfilled or, in
other words, 'earnest' is given to bind the contract.
(3) It is part of the purchase price when the transaction is carried out.
(4) It is forfeited when the transaction falls through by reason of the
default or failure of the purchaser.
(5) Unless there is anything to the contrary in the terms of the
contract, on default committed by the buyer, the seller is entitled to
forfeit the earnest" (At page 139)
"The learned Attorney General very strongly urged that the pleas
covered by the second contention of the appellant had never been
raised in the pleadings nor in the contentions urged before the High
Court. The question of the quantum of earnest deposit which was
forfeited being unreasonable or the forfeiture being by way of penalty,
were never raised by the appellants. The Attorney General also
pointed out that as noted by the High Court the appellants led no
evidence at all and, after abandoning the various pleas taken in the
plaint, the only question pressed before the High Court was that the
deposit was not by way of earnest and hence the amount could not be
forfeited. Unless the appellants had pleaded and established that there
was unreasonableness attached to the amount required to be deposited
under the contract or that the clause regarding forfeiture amounted to
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 29 of 43
a stipulation by way of a penalty, the respondents had no opportunity
to satisfy the Court that no question of unreasonableness or the
stipulation being by way of penalty arises. He further urged that the
question of unreasonableness or otherwise regarding earnest money
does not at all arise when it is forfeited according to the terms of the
contract.
In our opinion the learned Attorney General is well founded in his
contention that the appellants raised no such contentions covered by
the second point, noted above. It is therefore unnecessary for us to go
into the question as to whether the amount deposited by the appellants,
in this case, by way of earnest and forfeited as such, can be considered
to be reasonable or not. We express no opinion on the question as to
whether the element of unreasonableness can ever be considered
regarding the forfeiture of an amount deposited by way of earnest and
if so what are the necessary factors to be taken into account in
considering the reasonableness or otherwise of the amount deposited
by way of earnest. If the appellants were contesting the claim on any
such grounds, they should have laid the foundation for the same by
raising appropriate pleas and also led proper evidence regarding the
same, so that the respondents would have had an opportunity of
meeting such a claim."(At page 142)
37.      And finally in
ONGC Ltd. v. Saw Pipes Ltd.
, (2003) 5 SCC 705,
it was held:
"64. It is apparent from the aforesaid reasoning recorded by the
Arbitral Tribunal that it failed to consider
Sections 73
and
of the
Indian Contract Act and the
ratio
laid down in
Fateh Chand
case [AIR
1963 SC 140: (1964) 1 SCR 515 at p. 526] wherein it is specifically
held that jurisdiction of the court to award compensation in case of
breach of contract is unqualified except as to the maximum stipulated;
and compensation has to be reasonable. Under
Section 73
, when a
contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is
entitled to receive compensation for any loss caused to him which the
parties knew when they made the contract to be likely to result from
the breach of it. This section is to be read with
Section 74
, which deals
with penalty stipulated in the contract, inter alia (relevant for the
present case) provides that when a contract has been broken, if a sum
is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such
breach, the party complaining of breach is entitled, whether or not
actual loss is proved to have been caused, thereby to receive from the
party who has broken the contract reasonable compensation not
exceeding the amount so named.
Section 74
emphasizes that in case of
breach of contract, the party complaining of the breach is entitled to
receive reasonable compensation whether or not actual loss is proved
to have been caused by such breach. Therefore, the emphasis is on
reasonable compensation. If the compensation named in the contract is
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 30 of 43
by way of penalty, consideration would be different and the party is
only entitled to reasonable compensation for the loss suffered. But if
the compensation named in the contract for such breach is genuine
pre-estimate of loss which the parties knew when they made the
contract to be likely to result from the breach of it, there is no question
of proving such loss or such party is not required to lead evidence to
prove actual loss suffered by him.
67........In our view, in such a contract, it would be difficult to prove
exact loss or damage which the parties suffer because of the breach
thereof. In such a situation, if the parties have pre-estimated such loss
after clear understanding, it would be totally unjustified to arrive at
the conclusion that the party who has committed breach of the contract
is not liable to pay compensation. It would be against the specific
provisions of
Sections 73
and
of the Indian Contract Act. There was
nothing on record that compensation contemplated by the parties was
in any way unreasonable. It has been specifically mentioned that it was
an agreed genuine pre-estimate of damages duly agreed by the parties.
It was also mentioned that the liquidated damages are not by way of
penalty. It was also provided in the contract that such damages are to
be recovered by the purchaser from the bills for payment of the cost of
material submitted by the contractor. No evidence is led by the
claimant to establish that the stipulated condition was by way of
penalty or the compensation contemplated was, in any way,
unreasonable. There was no reason for the Tribunal not to rely upon
the clear and unambiguous terms of agreement stipulating pre-
estimate damages because of delay in supply of goods. Further, while
extending the time for delivery of the goods, the respondent was
informed that it would be required to pay stipulated damages.
68. From the aforesaid discussions, it can be held that:
(1) Terms of the contract are required to be taken into consideration
before arriving at the conclusion whether the party claiming damages
is entitled to the same.
(2) If the terms are clear and unambiguous stipulating the liquidated
damages in case of the breach of the contract unless it is held that such
estimate of damages/compensation is unreasonable or is by way of
penalty, party who has committed the breach is required to pay such
compensation and that is what is provided in
Section 73
of the
Contract Act.
(3)
Section 74
is to be read along with
Section 73
and, therefore, in
every case of breach of contract, the person aggrieved by the breach is
not required to prove actual loss or damage suffered by him before he
can claim a decree. The court is competent to award reasonable
compensation in case of breach even if no actual damage is proved to
have been suffered in consequence of the breach of a contract.
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 31 of 43
(4) In some contracts, it would be impossible for the court to assess
the compensation arising from breach and if the compensation
contemplated is not by way of penalty or unreasonable, the court can
award the same if it is genuine pre-estimate by the parties as the
measure of reasonable compensation."
38.     It will be seen that when it comes to forfeiture of earnest money, in
Fateh Chand
's case, counsel for the appellant conceded on facts that
Rs.1,000/- deposited as earnest money could be forfeited. (See: 1964 (1)
SCR Page 515 at 525 and 531).
39.     Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills & Another which was so heavily
relied by the Division Bench again was a case where the appellants
conceded that they committed breach of contract. Further, the respondents
also pleaded that the appellants had to pay them a sum of Rs.42,499/- for
loss and damage sustained by them. (See: 1970 (3) SCR 127 at Page 132).
This being the fact situation, only two questions were argued before the
Supreme Court: (1) that the amount paid by the plaintiff is not earnest
money and (2) that forfeiture of earnest money can be legal only if the
amount is considered reasonable. (at page 133). Both questions were
answered against the appellant. In deciding question two against the
appellant, this Court held:-
"But, as we have already mentioned, we do not propose to go into
those aspects in the case on hand. As mentioned earlier, the appellants
never raised any contention that the forfeiture of the amount amounted
to a penalty or that the amount forfeited is so large that the forfeiture
is bad in law. Nor have they raised any contention that the amount of
deposit is so unreasonable and therefore forfeiture of the entire
amount is not justified. The decision in Maula Bux's [1970]1SCR928
had no occasion to consider the question of reasonableness or
otherwise of the earnest deposit being forfeited. Because, from
the said
judgment
it is clear that this Court did not agree with the view of the
High Court that the deposits made, and which were under
consideration, were paid as earnest money. It is under those
circumstances that this Court proceeded to consider the applicability
Section 74
of the Contract Act. (At page 143)"
40.     From the above, it is clear that this Court held that Maula Bux's
case was not, on facts, a case that related to earnest money. Consequently,
the observation in Maula Bux that forfeiture of earnest money under a
contract if reasonable does not fall within
Section 74
, and would fall
within
Section 74
only if earnest money is considered a penalty is not on a
matter that directly arose for decision
in that case
The law
laid down by
Bench of 5 Judges in
Fateh Chand
's case is that all stipulations naming
amounts to be paid in case of breach would be covered by
Section 74
. This
is because
Section 74
cuts across the rules of the English Common Law by
enacting a uniform principle that would apply to all amounts to be paid in
case of breach, whether they are in the nature of penalty or otherwise.
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 32 of 43
must not be forgotten that as has been stated above, forfeiture of earnest
money on the facts in
Fateh Chand
's case was conceded. In the
circumstances, it would therefore be correct to say that as earnest
money is an amount to be paid in case of breach of contract and
named in the contract as such, it would necessarily be covered by
Section 74
41.     It must, however, be pointed out that in cases where a public
auction is held, forfeiture of earnest money may take place even before an
agreement is reached, as DDA is to accept the bid only after the earnest
money is paid. In the present case, under the terms and conditions of
auction, the highest bid (along with which earnest money has to be paid)
may well have been rejected. In such cases,
Section 74
may not be
attracted on its plain language because it applies only ―when a contract has
been broken‖.
42.     In the present case, forfeiture of earnest money took place long
after an agreement had been reached. It is obvious that the amount sought
to be forfeited on the facts of the present case is sought to be forfeited
without any loss being shown. In fact it has been shown that far from
suffering any loss, DDA has received a much higher amount on re-auction
of the same plot of land.
43.      On a conspectus of the above authorities, the law on compensation
for breach of contract under
Section 74
can be stated to be as follows:-
1. Where a sum is named in a contract as a liquidated amount payable
by way of damages, the party complaining of a breach can receive as
reasonable compensation such liquidated amount only if it is a genuine
pre-estimate of damages fixed by both parties and found to be such by
the Court. In other cases, where a sum is named in a contract as a
liquidated amount payable by way of damages, only reasonable
compensation can be awarded not exceeding the amount so stated.
Similarly, in cases where the amount fixed is in the nature of penalty,
only reasonable compensation can be awarded not exceeding the
penalty so stated. In both cases, the liquidated amount or penalty is the
upper limit beyond which the Court cannot grant reasonable
compensation.
2. Reasonable compensation will be fixed on well known principles
that are applicable to the law of contract, which are to be found inter
alia in Section 73 of the Contract Act
3. Since
Section 74
awards reasonable compensation for damage or
loss caused by a breach of contract, damage or loss caused is a sine
qua non for the applicability of the Section.
4. The Section applies whether a person is a plaintiff or a defendant in
a suit.
5. The sum spoken of may already be paid or be payable in future.
6. The expression ―whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to
have been caused thereby‖ means that where it is possible to prove
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 33 of 43
actual damage or loss, such proof is not dispensed with. It is only in
cases where damage or loss is difficult or impossible to prove that the
liquidated amount named in the contract, if a genuine pre-estimate of
damage or loss, can be awarded.
Section 74
will apply to cases of forfeiture of earnest money
under a contract. Where, however, forfeiture takes place under the
terms and conditions of a public auction before agreement is reached,
Section 74
would have no application.
44.     The Division Bench has gone wrong in principle. As has been
pointed out above, there has been no breach of contract by the appellant.
Further, we cannot accept the view of the Division Bench that the fact that
the DDA made a profit from re-auction is irrelevant, as that would fly in
the face of the most basic principle on the award of damages - namely,
that compensation can only be given for damage or loss suffered. If
damage or loss is not suffered, the law does not provide for a windfall."
(emphasis added)
15.
In sum and substance what is held by the Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court in the cases of
Fateh Chand
(supra) and
the recent judgment in
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra) is that
whenever there is a breach of contract then earnest money which is
forfeited because of the breach, whether by a plaintiff or a defendant
in a contract, the forfeiture is of that amount which are in fact
liquidated damages specified under a contract and that for claiming
damages under a contract, whether liquidated under
Section 74
of the
Contract Act or unliquidated under
Section 73
of the Contract Act,
existence of loss is a sine qua non. In other words, if no loss is caused
to a seller who has in his pocket monies of buyer, then the seller can
only forfeit a nominal amount unless the seller has pleaded and proved
RFA No.780/2017                                                   Page 34 of 43
that losses have been caused to him on account of the breach of
contract by the buyer. Once there is no pleading of loss suffered by a
seller under an agreement to sell, then large amounts cannot be
forfeited though so entitled to a seller under a clause of an agreement
to sell/contract entitling forfeiture of 'earnest money' because what is
forfeited is towards loss caused, and that except a nominal amount
being allowed to be forfeited as earnest money, any forfeiture of any
amount, which is not a nominal amount, can only be towards loss if
suffered by the seller.
Thus if there is no loss which is suffered by a
seller then there cannot be forfeiture of large amounts which is not a
nominal amount, simply because a clause in a contract provides so.
The following has been held in the judgment in the case of
Kailash
Nath Associates
(supra):-
(i)    As per the facts existing in the case of
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra) the Single Judge of the High Court had held that since no
damages were suffered by DDA therefore DDA could not forfeit the
earnest money.
Para 30 of Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra)).
(ii)   The Division Bench of the High Court however set aside the
judgment of the Single Judge by holding that amount tendered as
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 35 of 43
earnest money can be forfeited because and simply forfeiture of
amount called as earnest money can be forfeited in terms of the
contract. (
Para 30 of Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra)
reproducing Para 39 of the Division Bench judgment of the High
Court).
(iii)   Supreme Court in the case of
Kailash Nath Associates
(supra)
as per Para 44 of its judgment holds that the Division Bench of the
High Court had gone wrong in principle because compensation can be
awarded (where there is breach of contract) only if loss or damage is
suffered i.e where there is no loss or damage suffered as a result of
breach of contract no compensation can be awarded as law does not
provide for a windfall i.e large amounts though called contractually as
earnest money cannot be forfeited unless loss is pleaded and proved to
have been suffered.
These observations have cross-reference to Para
34 of the judgment of
Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra) where
with reference to the para of
Fateh Chand
's case (supra) it is held
that the language of
Section 74
of the Contract Act that 'whether or not
damage or loss is proved to have been caused by breach' is the
language that such language only discharges proof of actual loss but
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 36 of 43
that does not justify award of compensation where in consequence of
breach no injury/loss has at all resulted.
(iv)   Earnest money is an amount to be paid in case of breach of
contract, and named in contract as such, and that forfeiture of earnest
money is covered under the entitlement to liquidated damages under
Section 74
of the Contract Act vide Para 40 in the case of
Kailash
Nath Associates
(supra).
(v)    The language of
Section 74
of the Contract Act that "whether
or not actual loss or damage is proved to have been caused thereby"
means only that where it is difficult or impossible to prove loss caused
by the breach of contract then the liquidated damages/amount (being
the amount of earnest money) can be awarded vide
Para 43(6) of
Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra) but where nature of contract is
such that loss caused because of breach can be assessed and so proved
then in such cases loss suffered must be proved to claim the liquidated
damages of earnest money.
This finding has cross reference to Para 37
of judgment in
Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra) where the
observations of Supreme Court in Para 67 of the case of ONGC Ltd.
Vs. Saw Pipes Ltd. (2003) 5 SCC 705 are quoted that liquidated
RFA No.780/2017                                            Page 37 of 43
damages are awarded where it is difficult to prove exact loss or
damage caused as a result of breach of contract.
(vi)   Even where liquidated damages can be awarded under
Section
of the Contract Act because loss or damages cannot be proved in a
contractual breach yet if the liquidated damages (earnest money) are a
penalty amount by its nature i.e prescribed liquidated damages figure
is unreasonable, then for the liquidated damages amount or earnest
money amount forfeiture cannot be granted/allowed and that only
reasonable amount is allowed as damages with the figure of liquidated
damages being the upper limit vide
Para 43(1) of               Kailash Nath
Associates
's case (supra).
16.           Similar ratio as has been
laid down by
the Supreme Court
Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra) was also the ratio of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
V.K. Ashokan Vs.
Assistant Excise Commissioner and Others
(2009) 14 SCC 85 and
paras 66 to 71 of this judgment reads as under:-
"66. There is another aspect of the matter which cannot be lost sight of.
If damages cannot be calculated and the terms of the contract provides
therefor only for penalty by way of liquidated damages, having regard to
the provisions contained in
Section 74
of the Indian Contract Act a
reasonable sum only could be recovered which need not in all situations
even be the sum specified in the contract. (See
Maula Bux vs. Union of
India
and
Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills vs. Tata Air Craft Ltd
RFA No.780/2017                                                  Page 38 of 43
67.
Section 74
of the Contract Act reads as under:
"74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated for-
When a contract has been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as
the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the contract contains
any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining of the
breach is entitled, whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to
have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who has broken
the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so
named or, as the case may be, the penalty stipulated for."
68.     There are authorities, no doubt coloured by the view which was
taken in English cases, that
Section 74of
the Contract Act would have no
application to cases of deposit for due performance of a contract which is
stipulated to be forfeited for breach, e.g.,.
Natesa Aiyar v. Appavu
Padayachi
Singer Manufacturing Company v. Raja Prosad
Manian
Patter v. The Madras Railway Company
, but this view no longer is good
law in view of the judgment of this Court in
Fateh Chand vs. Balkishan
Das
69.     This Court in
Fateh Chand
case observed at pp. 526-27 (of SCR):
―10.
Section 74
of the Contract Act deals with the measure of damages
in two classes of cases (i) where the contract names a sum to be paid in
case of breach, and (ii) where the contract contains any other
stipulation by way of penalty. ... The measure of damages in the case
of breach of a stipulation by way of penalty is by
Section 74
reasonable compensation not exceeding the penalty stipulated for.‖
The Court also observed: (AIR p. 1411, para 11)
―11. It was urged that the section deals in terms with the right to
receive from the party who has broken the contract reasonable
compensation and not the right to forfeit what has already been
received by the party aggrieved. There is however no warrant for the
assumption made by some of the High Courts in India, that
Section 74
applies only to cases where the aggrieved party is seeking to receive
some amount on breach of contract and not to cases where upon breach
of contract an amount received under the contract is sought to be
forfeited. In our judgment the expression ‗the contract contains any
other stipulation by way of penalty' comprehensively applies to every
covenant involving a penalty whether it is for payment on breach of
contract of money or delivery of property in future, or for forfeiture of
right to money or other property already delivered. Duty not to enforce
the penalty clause but only to award reasonable compensation is
statutorily imposed upon courts by
Section 74
. In all cases, therefore,
where there is a stipulation in the nature of penalty for forfeiture of an
amount deposited pursuant to the terms of contract which expressly
provides for forfeiture, the court has jurisdiction to award such sum
only as it considers reasonable, but not exceeding the amount specified
in the contract as liable to forfeiture.‖
RFA No.780/2017                                                     Page 39 of 43
and that,
―14. ... There is no ground for holding that the expression ‗contract
contains any other stipulation by way of penalty' is limited to cases of
stipulation in the nature of an agreement to pay money or deliver
property on breach and does not comprehend covenants under which
amounts paid or property delivered under the contract, which by the
terms of the contract expressly or by clear implication are liable to be
forfeited.‖ (AIR p. 1412, para 14)
70.      Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for sale of property
whether movable or immovable, if the amount is reasonable, would not
fall within
Section 74
. That has been opined in several cases. (See Kunwar
Chiranjit Singh v. Har Swarup;
Roshan Lal v. Delhi Cloth and General
Mills       Co.     Ltd.
Mohd.     Habib-ullah v. Mohd.       Shafi
; Bishan
Chand v. Radha Kishan Das.) These cases have explained that forfeiture
of a reasonable amount paid as earnest money does not amount to
imposing a penalty. But if forfeiture is of the nature of penalty,
Section 74
applies.
71.      Where under the terms of the contract the party in breach has
undertaken to pay a sum of money or to forfeit a sum of money which he
has already paid to the party complaining of a breach of contract, the
undertaking is of the nature of a penalty. (See Maula Bux and Saurabh
Prakash v. DLF Universal Ltd. )"                          (emphasis added)
17.          All the judgments of the Supreme Court which have been
relied upon in
Satish Batra
's case (supra) are of a Bench strength
lesser than the Constitution Bench strength of the Supreme Court in
Fateh Chand
's case (supra) and the law is well settled that it is the
judgment of the larger Bench of the Supreme Court which will prevail
over the judgment of a Bench strength of lesser number of judges.
Also, as already stated above, in the recent judgment in
Kailash Nath
Associates
's case (supra) Supreme Court has now clarified that a
forfeiture of an earnest money necessarily falls under
Section 74
of the
RFA No.780/2017                                                    Page 40 of 43
Contract Act
i.e before forfeiture can take place it must be necessary
that loss must be caused.
Also, Supreme Court has further clarified in
Kailash Nath Associates
's case (supra) that it is very much possible
that forfeiture of an amount can be in the nature of penalty and if the
amount which is allowed to be forfeited under the contract is in the
nature of penalty then Courts are empowered to treat the amount of
liquidated damages (earnest money) as one in the nature of penalty
clause and that earnest money amount only represents the upper limit
of damages which are allowed to be forfeited in terms of the forfeiture
clause, and actual forfeiture only of a lesser and a reasonable amount
should be allowed instead of the large amount/penalty as stated under
a contract as being entitled to be forfeited and that too merely because
a contractual clause allows such a forfeiture.
18.(i)       In view of the aforesaid discussion, this appeal is allowed
to a limited extent that the appellant/defendant is held entitled to
forfeit only a nominal sum of Rs.50,000/- and not a sum of
Rs.9,00,000/- as claimed by the appellant/defendant inasmuch as no
loss is pleaded and proved to be caused to the appellant/defendant on
account of the breach of the agreement to sell by the
RFA No.780/2017                                           Page 41 of 43
respondent/plaintiff. The impugned judgment of the trial court
therefore is partly modified in that the judgment and decree in favour
of the respondent/plaintiff will be only of an amount of Rs.8,50,000/-
and not Rs.9,00,000/-. Also, in exercise of powers under
Order XLI
Rule 33 CPC
, and as prayed before this Court on behalf of the
respondent/plaintiff, since the trial court has not granted pre-suit
interest, I hold that the impugned judgment and decree which only
grants pendente lite and future interest will be modified in view of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in
South Eastern Coalfileds Ltd. Vs.
State of M.P. and Others
(2003) 8 SCC 648 (as per paras 21 and 22
thereof) that the respondent/plaintiff will be entitled to interest at the
rate granted by trial court of 12% per annum from the date of the
agreement to sell being 15.9.2005 till the filing of the suit also i.e
respondent/plaintiff will be entitled to interest at 12% per annum on
the amount of Rs.8,50,000/- from 15.9.2005 till the filing of the suit,
and thereafter pendente lite and future till payment. Decree sheet be
drawn accordingly.
(ii)   Amount deposited by the appellant/defendant in this Court in
terms of the order dated 12.9.2017 be paid to the respondent/plaintiff
RFA No.780/2017                                             Page 42 of 43
by the Registry of this Court in appropriate satisfaction of the present
judgment and since the amount deposited in this case by the
appellant/defendant is not sufficient for satisfaction of the judgment
and decree passed today in favour of the respondent/plaintiff, the
respondent/plaintiff is always at liberty to initiate execution
proceedings for recovery of the balance amount against the
appellant/defendant.
19.          The appeal is accordingly disposed of, leaving the parties
to bear their own costs.
FEBRUARY 27, 2018                           VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
Ne/godara
RFA No.780/2017                                            Page 43 of 43