Title: Kuruva Muliniti Lakshmana, Kurnool ... vs State Of Ap., Rep. Pp. Hyd., on 14 September, 2020
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/189330291/
Court: Unknown
Date: Unknown

================================================================================

Andhra Pradesh High Court - Amravati
Kuruva Muliniti Lakshmana, Kurnool ... vs State Of Ap., Rep. Pp. Hyd., on 14 September, 2020
Author:
U.Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U.Durga Prasad Rao
Ninala Jayasurya
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO
AND
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE NINALA JAYASURYA
Criminal Appeal No.1054 of 2014
JUDGMENT:
(Per Hon'ble Sri Justice U.Durga Prasad Rao)
This appeal is filed by the accused aggrieved by the judgment
dated 09.10.2014 in S.C.No.111 of 2014 passed by the learned
II Additional Sessions Judge, Kurnool convicting him for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC and sentencing to undergo
imprisonment for life and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/-.
2)    The prosecution case is thus:
a)    The deceased Kuruva Moolinti Suri and the accused are cousin
brothers and their houses are adjacent to each other in Marella Village,
Tuggali Mandal, Kurnool District.         PW.1-Lakshmana and LW.2-
Seshamma are the parents of the deceased. PW.2-Lingamma is his wife.
There were ill feelings and property disputes between the family of PW.1
and accused. While so, on 27.10.2013 the accused quarrelled with his
parents and beat his father Beerappa. Seeing it, the deceased intervened
and chastised the accused. The accused grew wild and retorted that it
was none of his business and threatened him with dire consequences.
b)    The further case of the prosecution is that PW.4-K. Moolinti
Kistappa is the cousin brother of the deceased as his father Ranganna is
the brother of PW.1. On 28.10.2013, in the afternoon the deceased
returned from agriculture work and slept in the verendah of the house of
Kistappa which is opposite to his house. His parents and wife were
sitting inside the house of Kistappa and talking with him and his wife
Jayamma. At that time the accused loitered in front of the house of PW.4
two or three times. At about 3.00 P.M. they suddenly heard cries of the
deceased and on coming out of the house, they found the accused was
hacking with an axe on the left side ear region of deceased. By the time
they came out, he already inflicted a blow on the head of the deceased.
On seeing them, the accused skulked away with the axe. The deceased
died spontaneously. PW.1 rushed to the Tuggali Police Station and gave
Ex.P1-report at about 5.30 P.M. against the accused which was registered
as case in Cr.No.81/2013 by the S.H.O for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC. Later PW.6, who is the Inspector of Police, Pattikonda
circle conducted investigation. He conducted inquest over the dead body
and sent it for Post Mortem and later arrested the accused in the presence
of mediators and on his statement, recovered MO.8-weapon and
produced the accused before the concerned Magistrate for remand and on
receiving the FSL report laid charge sheet against the accused for the
offence under
Section 302
IPC.
c)    The trial Court, on appearance of the accused, framed charge under
Section 302
IPC which he denied and claimed to be tried. During the
course of trial, PWs 1 to 6 were examined and exhibits P1 to P12 were
marked and MOs 1 to 8 were exhibited.
d)    Before trial Court, the plea of accused is one of total denial of the
offence. One of the defence suggestions is that the deceased being a
drunkard might fell on a sharp object and sustained injuries and died for
which accused was not responsible. The second defence is that he faintly
pleaded that he was suffering with epilepsy and therefore, he did not
know the consequence of his act. Both the above defence pleas were
rejected by the trial Court holding that the evidence of eye witnesses-
PWs 1 to 4 amply established the crime committed by the accused. He
was accordingly convicted and sentenced as stated supra.
Hence, the appeal.
3)       The parties in this appeal are referred as they stood before the trial
Court.
4)       Heard arguments of Sri Raja Gopallavan Tayi, learned counsel for
the appellant, and learned Public Prosecutor for the State (Andhra
Pradesh).
5)       While severely fulminating the conviction of the trial Court as
devoid of reliable and independent evidence and non-consideration of the
defence contentions, learned counsel for the appellant argued firstly, the
accused was falsely implicated by PW1 in view of the long drawn
property disputes between the two families. He would argue that though
allegedly the incident took place in verendah of the house of PW.4, to the
public gaze, curiously the prosecution has not cited a single eye witness
except the family members of the deceased who are interested and highly
inimical towards the accused. Therefore, the evidence of PWs.1 & 2 who
are the father and wife of the deceased respectively, ought to have been
disbelieved and discarded by the trial Court. PW.4 is concerned, he
would argue, he is also the cousin brother of the accused and admittedly
there are disputes between both the families and PW.4 had no talking
terms with the accused since five years from the date of his evidence. As
such, his evidence is liable to be discarded as he is also an antagonist of
accused. Learned counsel would thus argue that since the evidence of all
the three eye witnesses is not free from bias and no independent
witnesses were examined by the prosecution, the guilt of the accused
cannot be said to be established beyond reasonable doubt.
Secondly, he argued that the deceased was a drunkard and
therefore, the injuries which he sustained might occurred while he fell on
a sharp object in a drunken state. Referring to the evidence of PW.3, he
argued that the Post Mortem Doctor has admitted that the injuries were
possible if the deceased fell on a sharp edged stone. Learned counsel
vehemently argued that the prosecution therefore, cannot claim that the
injuries were caused only by hacking with MO.8-axe. On that count also
the accused deserves acquittal, he argued.
Nextly learned counsel advanced an alternative argument to the
effect that even assuming that the accused inflicted the blows on the
deceased, it was unintentional for the reason that he was suffering with
epilepsy at the time of offence and not knowing the consequences of his
acts. Therefore, he deserves acquittal since his acts squarely fall within
the ambit of
Section 84
IPC. Finally, learned counsel submitted that the
accused has been in jail since last six years and considering points of his
argument the appeal may be allowed.
6)    Per contra, learned Public Prosecutor argued that PWs 1, 2 & 4 are
natural witnesses, but not interested witnesses as the offence took place
at the house of PW.4 and being the inmates of the house, they have
witnessed the ghastly act of the accused. He strenuously argued that
there may be property disputes between the families of the accused and
deceased, but there is no bitter enmity between them so as to implicate
the accused, who is none other than the cousin brother of the deceased.
Referring to the incident that occurred on the previous day of the death of
the deceased, learned Public Prosecutor submitted that when the accused
was altercating with his own parents on some issue and assaulting them,
unable to digest it, the deceased intervened and questioned the accused of
his highhanded act. He would argue that the said incident would reveal
that though property disputes were pending between both the families,
the natural love out of blood relationship had not eroded among them and
that was the reason why the deceased intervened and questioned the
accused as to why he was attacking his own parents and in order to
prevent his highhanded acts, even gave a slap to him. In this backdrop,
he would argue, it is highly unlikely that the family members of the
deceased would ruthlessly implicate the accused instead of prosecuting
the real culprit. So far as PW.4 is concerned, he argued that admittedly
he had no talking terms with the accused since few years prior to the
incident. However, both accused and deceased are his cousin brothers
and therefore there is no reason for him to implicate the accused in a
false case just because of the property disputes. He thus argued that the
evidence of PWs 1, 2 & 4 is intrinsic and mutually corroborative
regarding the crime perpetrated by accused and therefore the trial Court
rightly believed their version.
Nextly he argued that the theory of accidental fall proponed by the
accused will not stand to legal scrutiny, if the unimpeachable evidence of
PWs 1, 2 & 4 is accepted, as, they unequivocally testified that the injuries
were inflicted by none other than the accused himself. Even otherwise,
PW.3 in the re-examination clarified that only the second injury is
possible by falling on the sharp edged stone, but two injuries as
mentioned in Ex.P2 were not possible to be caused simultaneously. In
that view, the said defence argument is preposterous, he would contend.
Nextly, learned Public Prosecutor argued that since the epilepsy
plea is one of the general exceptions enunciated in Chapter-IV of
IPC
the burden rest on the accused to establish the said plea beyond
reasonable doubt. However, except eliciting a stray answer from PW.1
that the accused was an epilepsy patient, no medical record was produced
to show that at the actual time of offence he was reeling under epilepsy to
such an extent that he was not knowing the consequences of his acts.
Therefore, the plea of accused does not merit consideration. He further
argued that even though PW.1 admitted that the accused was an epilepsy
patient but denied the suggestion that he is a mentally disturbed person.
Thereby, he was not admitting that the mental cognitive faculties of the
accused were so ruined depriving him of knowing the consequences of
his acts and activities. He concluded that it was a pre-meditated and cold
blooded murder and prayed to dismiss the appeal.
7)    The points for consideration are:
1)   Whether the deceased met with homicidal death
and if so, the accused was responsible for his
murder?
2)   If Point No.1 is held affirmatively, whether the
accused deserves acquittal on the ground of
unsoundness of mind in view of the exception
provided in
Section 84
IPC?
8)    Point No.1:     While it is the case of the prosecution that the
accused brutally hacked the deceased on his head at about 3.00 P.M. on
28.10.2013 when he was sleeping in the verendah of the house of PW.4,
conversely, the argument of the accused is that the deceased was a
drunkard and in an inebriated condition he might fell on a sharp object
and sustained injuries and died and a false case is foisted against him in
view of the family feuds relating to properties.
a)    We gave our anxious consideration to the above respective
arguments. The prosecution in order to prove that the death of deceased
was a homicide, mainly relied upon the evidence of PWs 1 to 4. While
PWs 1, 2 & 4 are the father, wife and cousin brother of the deceased
respectively, PW.3 is the doctor who conducted Post Mortem on
deceased. Hence, we meticulously scrutinized their evidence.
b)    As per the prosecution, the death was occurred at about 3.00 P.M.
on 28.10.2013. P.W.1 promptly lodged Ex.P1-report at about 5.30 P.M.
with the SHO. Tuggali P.S. who registered Ex.P8-FIR and commenced
investigation. PW.3, on requisition conducted Post Mortem on the dead
body on 29.10.2013 and noted:
(i)    The lacerated injury on left parietal region measuring
about 10 x 4 x 2 ½ C.Ms.
(ii)   A lacerated injury on left ear measuring about 8 cm x 3
cm defeth.
Cause of death to the best of my knowledge is
"Hemorrhagic shock" due to fracture of skull bone and
due to intra cranial bleeding.
c)    Accordingly, he issued Ex.P2-P.M. report. During his evidence,
he stated that the external injuries could be possible with axe or any other
sharp weapon. During the cross examination, he stated that the injuries
mentioned in Post Mortem examination are possible even if a person falls
on a sharp edged stone. Probably basing on this answer, the defence side
argued that the injuries might be caused while the deceased falling on a
sharp edged object like stone and hence, his death was more an accident
than homicide. We cannot appreciate this argument for, PW.3 in his re-
examination categorically stated that even if a person fell on sharp edged
stone, only the second injury is possible, but two injuries as mentioned
by him in Ex.P2 were not simultaneously possible. This answer clarifies
that only one injury i.e., injury No.2 could be possible on an accidental
fall on a sharp edged stone. We have no reason to differ with PW.3.
Moreover, none of the prosecution witnesses admitted the suggestion that
the deceased was a drunkard. Therefore, the theory of accidental fall can
be safely omitted.
Then a further scrutiny of the evidence of PW.3 and Ex.P2-Post
Mortem report would show that the deceased suffered two big lacerated
injuries and sustained fracture of skull bone. According to PW.3, the
external injuries are possible with an axe or other sharp edged weapon.
Omitting the theory of accidental fall, what remains is the infliction of
blows with an axe like M.O.8. Then Ex.P3-RFSL report shows that
items 1 to 6 and 8 which were referred to the RFSL contained human
blood. Items 1 to 4 are the clothes of the deceased, item 5 is his waist
thread and item 8 is the blood stained axe. All these items were marked
as material objects during the trial. It is to be noted that the I.O. has
recovered M.O.8 under the cover of Ex.P7-Panchanama on the revelation
of accused in the presence of PW.5-the mediator. Though the accused
denied to have revealed about M.O.8, however, Ex.P7 document contains
his signature. Thus, a conspectus of the oral and documentary evidence
clearly projects that the deceased received blows with MO.8-axe and met
with instantaneous death.
d)    Then we scrutinized the evidence of PWs 1, 2 & 4. It must be said
they categorically deposed about the heinous crime committed by the
accused. PW.1 is the father of deceased and he deposed that on the date
of offence at about 3.00 P.M. when the deceased was sleeping on the
verendah of PW.4 and when this witness, his wife and daughter-in-law
were sitting inside the house of PW.4, they observed the accused loitered
in front of the house of PW.4 for two or three times. Then suddenly they
heard the cries of the deceased and when they came out of the house,
they saw the accused hacking him with an axe on the left ear. By the
time they came out of the house already one blow was inflicted by the
accused on the back of his head. His son received profuse bleeding
injuries on his head and ear and died instantaneously, whereas the
accused fled away from the scene with the axe. According to PW.1, the
reason for the attack was that on the previous day when the accused was
quarrelling with his parents and assaulting them, the deceased intervened
and chastised him. The accused shouted at deceased and warned him not
to interfere in his family matters and during that conversation he
threatened the deceased to kill. In the cross-examination, he admitted
that there were no talking terms between the two families since last four
or five years.   He denied the suggestion that because the deceased
misunderstandings arose between both the families. He also denied that
the deceased was a drunkard. He further denied the suggestion that he
did not witness the incident and at that time he was at his fields. He
emphatically stated that when he came out of the house, he saw the
accused hacking the deceased with an axe and he stated so to the police.
Though he admitted that the accused is an epilepsy patient, but denied the
suggestion that he was a mentally disturbed person and the villagers
called him as 'Thikkalodu' (fickle mind).       He also denied that the
deceased fell on a stone in a drunken condition and sustained head
injuries.
e)     Then PW.2 is the wife of the deceased. She also deposed in
similar lines saying that on the date of incident at about 3.00 P.M. while
her husband was sleeping in the verendah of the house of PW.4 and when
herself, PW.1, her mother-in-law (LW.2), PW.4 and his wife Jayamma
(LW.5) were chitchatting in the house of PW.4, they suddenly heard the
cries of her husband and immediately they rushed out and saw the
accused hacking on the left ear of her husband with an axe and retreating
from the scene and her husband died on the spot. She gave the same
reason as PW.1 for the attack on her husband. In the cross-examination,
she admitted that there were no talking terms between the two families
since last three years because of the property disputes. She denied her
husband was a drunkard.       She denied that she did not witness the
incident. She stated that she does not know whether accused was an
epilepsy patient, but she denied that he was a mentally disturbed person
and villagers call him as 'Thikkalodu'.
f)    PW.4 deposed the deceased was his cousin brother being the son
of his junior paternal uncle (PW.1). Regarding incident, he testified that
on that day the deceased was sleeping in the verendah in front of his
house while himself, PW.1, PW.2, Seshamma and Jayamma were
chitchatting inside the house. On hearing the huge cry of the deceased,
they rushed out and saw the accused hacking the deceased with an axe on
his left ear. On seeing them, the accused fled away and the deceased
died on the spot. He also deposed about the property disputes between
the families of the accused and deceased and about the incident on the
previous day. During the cross-examination, he stated that there were no
talking terms between him and accused since four or five years because
of the property disputes. He denied that the deceased was a drunkard.
To a question he stated that they did not try to catch hold the accused as
they were attending the injured. He also denied that the deceased fell on
a sharp edged stone and died. He denied the accused was an epilepsy
patient.
g)       On close analysis, consistency and mutual corroboration are
hallmarks of their evidence. It is true the above witnesses are the close
relations of the deceased. However, it must be noted, there is a marked
difference between the 'interested witnesses' and 'relation witnesses'.
State of Rajasthan v. Smt. Kalki1
the Apex Court distinguished
between 'interested' and 'related' witnesses as follows:
"Related' is not equivalent to 'interested'. A witness may be
called 'interested' only when he or she derives some benefit from the
result of a litigation; in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing an
accused person punished. A witness who is a natural one and is the
only possible eye witness in the circumstances of a case cannot be said
to be 'interested'."
h)       It should be noted above observation was made by the Apex Court
when the High Court declined to rely on the evidence of PW.1-wife of
the deceased on the ground that she was a highly interested witness. The
Apex Court considering the facts of the case observed that she was the
only person present in the hut with the deceased at the time of occurrence
and hence, she was the most natural witness and therefore, she had no
interest in protecting the real culprit and falsely implicating the
respondents.
i)       We also deem it apposite to quote another decision of the Apex
Court reported in
Rana Pratap v. State of Haryana2
wherein the
distinction between 'natural witness' and 'chance witness' was
delineated as follows:
3. xxxx Murders are not committed with previous notice to
witnesses; soliciting their presence. If murder is committed in a
dwelling house, the inmates of the house are natural witnesses.
If murder is committed in a brothel, prostitutes and paramours are
AIR 1981 SC 1390
AIR 1983 SC 680
natural witnesses. If murder is committed in a street, only passersby
will be witnesses. Their evidence cannot be brushed aside or viewed
with suspicion on the ground that that they are mere chance witnesses'.
The expression 'chance witnesses' is borrowed from countries where
every man's home is considered his castle and every one must have an
explanation for his presence elsewhere or in another man's castle. It is
a most unsuitable expression in a country whose people are less formal
and more casual. To discard the evidence of street hawkers and street
vendors on the ground that they are 'chance witnesses' even where
murder is committed in a street is to abandon good sense and take too
shallow a view of the evidence.
j)    In the light of the above jurisprudence, PW.1, 2 & 4 can only be
regarded as natural witnesses, but not interested witnesses or chance
witnesses since the murder took place at the house of PW.4. The house
of PW.4 is opposite to the house of PW.1 and since they are relations,
there was every possibility for PW1, his wife and PW.2 to gather in the
house of PW.4 at the time of incident. Merely because they are relations
of the deceased their evidence cannot be discarded. It is true that there
exist property disputes between the two families by dint of which there
were no talking terms among them. However, that can not be a reason
for them to let the real culprit scot free and implicate the accused if he is
innocent. As rightly argued by the learned Public Prosecutor, the natural
affection seems to have not eroded between them which is evident from
the previous day's incident.          On that day when the accused was
quarrelling with his parents and assaulting them, the deceased intervened
and chastised him for his highhanded acts. To show such concern for his
paternal uncle and aunt, the property disputes did not interdict him.
Therefore, the defence plea that a false case was foisted against the
accused because of the property disputes and to usurp his properties by
sending him to jail does not merit consideration. The further argument
that no independent witnesses were examined also has no legs to stand
because the accused has not elicited from PWs 1, 2 & 4 about the
presence of independent witnesses at the time of incident. Moreover, we
don't think, by implicating the accused, P.Ws.1 & 2 will derive any
interest like getting his properties because the accused has his own
parents and other family members to take after his properties. The
evidence of PWs 1, 2 & 4 is intrinsic, blemishless and mutually
corroborative on the material particulars. No material contradictions were
brought forth to impeach their credibility. Hence, relying upon their
formidable evidence we hold that the accused had committed the murder
of the deceased by hacking him with axe and the prosecution has
established the guilt of the accused to hilt beyond the pale of doubt.
9.    Point No.2 : This point is concerned, it is trite law that if any
person claims any of the exceptions provided in Chapter IV of
IPC
under
the caption "General Exceptions", the burden of proving that his case
comes within such exceptions rests on him and the Court shall presume
the absence of such circumstances as per
Section 105
of the Evidence
Act. In that view, it is for the accused to establish that his case squarely
falls within the ambit of
Section 84
IPC. This section reads thus:
"84. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at
the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable
of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either
wrong or contrary to law."
Section 84
embodies fundamental maxim of criminal law i.e.,
actus non reum facit nisi mens sit rea (an act does not constitute guilt
unless done with a guilty intention). To constitute the offence, the intent
and act must concur.
Section 84
lends statutory recognition to the
defence of insanity, as developed by the common law of England, in the
House of Lords decision, in the case of
R. v. Daniel Mc. Naughten3
commonly referred to as the Mc Naughten Rules. It is now well settled
that under
section 84
IPC, a person is exonerated from liability for doing
an act on the ground of unsoundness of mind if he, at the time of doing
the act, is either incapable of knowing (a) the nature of the act, or (b) that
he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. The accused is
protected not only when, on account of insanity, he was incapable of
knowing the nature of the act, but also when he did not know either that
the act was wrong or that it was contrary to law, although he might know
the nature of the act itself. He is, however, not protected if he knew that
what he was doing was wrong, even if he did not know that it was
contrary to law, and also if he knew that what he was doing was contrary
to law even though he did not know that it was wrong.
b)        In
Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakker v. State of Gujarat4
, the
Apex Court has expounded the doctrine of burden of proof in the context
of plea of insanity thus:
13. (1) The prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused had committed the offence with the requisite mens
rea; and the burden of proving that always rests on the prosecution
from the beginning to the end of the trial.
(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that the accused was not
insane, when he committed the crime, in the sense
laid down by
s. 84
of the Indian Penal Code: the accused may rebut it by placing before
the court all the relevant evidence - oral, documentary or
circumstantial, but the burden of proof upon him is no higher than that
rests upon a party to civil proceedings.
(3) Even if the accused was not able to establish conclusively
that he was insane at the time he committed the offence, the evidence
1843 R.R. 59: 8 ER 718 (HL)
MANU/SC/0068/1964
placed before the court by the accused or by the prosecution may raise
a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court as regards one or more of
the ingredients of the offence, including mens rea of the accused and
in that case
the court would be entitled to acquit the accused on the
ground that the general burden of proof resting on the prosecution was
not discharged.
c)        In
Bapu v. State of Rajasthan5
the Apex Court expounded as to
when the benefit under
Section 84
can be extended.
"11. The section itself provides that the benefit is available
only after it is proved that at the time of committing the act, the
accused was labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of
the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was
doing, or that even if he did not know it, it was either wrong or
contrary to law then this section must be applied. The crucial point of
time for deciding whether the benefit of this section should be given or
not, is the material time when the offence takes place (emphasis
applied). In coming to that conclusion, the relevant circumstances are
to be taken into consideration, it would be dangerous to admit the
defence of insanity upon arguments derived merely from the character
of the crime. It is only unsoundness of mind which naturally impairs
the cognitive faculties of the mind that can form a ground of:
exemption from criminal responsibility."
d)        In the light of above jurimetrics, when facts enunciated from
evidence are analysed, except extracting a stray admission from PW.1
that the accused was an epilepsy patient, the defence side has not
produced any cogent evidence as to the nature of the so called epilepsy
and daunting effect on the brain of the accused and more particularly,
whether the accused was reeling under the epileptical clout at the actual
time of commission of the act so as to bring his case under the above
exception. A feeble argument was no doubt advanced that his altercation
with his own parents and beating them on the previous day was itself a
self explanatory of the fact that his cognitive faculties were defective and
he was suffering with epilepsy. This argument is to be noted only to be
rejected, for, the previous and subsequent acts of the accused did not
MANU/SC/7754/2007 = (2007) 8 SCC 66
manifest any erratic or weird conduct.     The record shows when the
deceased intervened, he objected for his intervention and threatened him
with dire consequences. Further, before incident he moved twice or
thrice in front of the house of PW.4 watching the movements of the
deceased. He prowled, poached and perpetrated the crime by axing the
deceased. Further, immediately after the incident when PW.1 and others
rushed there, seeing them, he skulked away with axe. All these acts on
his part strongly suggest his mental sanity rather illness. Therefore, we
are not prepared to accept the alleged unsoundness of accused as an
exception under
Section 84
IPC. Accordingly, we find no merits in this
appeal.
10.   In the result, this Criminal Appeal is dismissed by confirming the
conviction and sentence passed in S.C.No.111 of 2014, dated 09.10.2014,
by the learned II Additional Sessions Judge, Kurnool.
As a sequel, interlocutory applications pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
_________________________
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J
_______________________
NINALA JAYASURYA, J
Dt:14.09.2020
B/o. MVA / MS