Title: Kailash Satyanarayan Khandal vs Vijaykumar Satnarayan Khandal And ... on 15 January, 2018
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/26299100/
Court: Unknown
Date: Unknown

================================================================================

Bombay High Court
Kailash Satyanarayan Khandal vs Vijaykumar Satnarayan Khandal And ... on 15 January, 2018
Author:
Ravindra V. Ghuge
Bench:
Ravindra V. Ghuge
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE OF BOMBAY
BENCH AT AURANGABAD
WRIT PETITION NO.1210 OF 2016
Kailash s/o Satyanarayan Khandal,
Age-59 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Ambedkar Chowk,
Hingoli                                            -- PETITIONER
VERSUS
1.     Vijaykumar s/o Satnarayan Khandal,
Age-65 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Royal Residency, Pushpa Nagari,
Aurangabad,
2.     Santoshkumar s/o Satnarayan Khandal,
Age-56 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Laxmi Vyankatesh,
Ward No.15, House No.280/3,
Jamdade Mala, Parshwanath Colony,
Ichalkaranji, Dist.Kolhapur,
3.     Jagdish s/o Satnarayan Khandal,
Age-50 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Gulab Bhavan, In front of Parashar Bank,
Indore (MP),
4.     Jyoti w/o Sunil Khandal,
Age-39 years, Occu-Household,
R/o Vijay Kirana Stores, Gorkshan Road,
Akola, Through G.P.A.
Rajendra s/o Satyanarayan Khandal,
Age-55 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Anmol Complex, Ganesh Colony,
Nagpur Road, Wardha,
District Wardha.
5.     Rajendra s/o Satnarayan Khandal,
Age-56 years, Occu-Business,
R/o Anmol Complex, Ganesh Colony,
Nagpur Road, Wardha,
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
District Wardha,
6.     Bhumika d/o Sunil Khandal,
Age-23 years, Occu-Education,
R/o Jay Bhole Kirana Shop,
Gorakshan Road, Akola,
District Akola,
7.     Satnarayan s/o Chothmal Khandal,
Age-84 years, Occu-Nil,
R/o Ambedkar Chowk, Hingoli,
8.     Parwatibai w/o Satnarayan Khandal,
Age-80 years, Occu-Household,
R/o Ambedkar Chowk, Hingoli
9.     Pushpadevi w/o Satnarayan Khandal,
(Deleted)
Age-64 years, Occu-Household,
R/o Marwadi Galli, Maheboobabad,
Taluka Maheboobabad,
District : Warangal (AP)
10.    Padmawati w/o Dwarkadas Sharma,
(Deleted)
Age-60 years, Occu-Household,
R/o A-2, Sara Garden, Behind Sharolet
Showroom, Mukundwai,
Aurangabad,
11.    Leeladevi w/o Nandkumar Ghan,
Age-56 years, Occu-Household,
R/o A.P.Patel and Company,
Near Ambedkar Chowk, Hingoli,
Dist.Hingoli                                      -- RESPONDENTS
Mr.S.S.Gangakhedkar, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr.D.M.Shinde, Advocate for respondent Nos. 1 to 6.
( CORAM : RAVINDRA V. GHUGE, J.)
DATE  : 15/01/2018
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
ORAL JUDGMENT :
1.     Rule.  Rule made returnable forthwith and heard finally by the
consent of the parties.
2.     The petitioner is the original defendant challenging the order of
the Trial Court dated 08/10/2015 by which application Exh.49 has
been rejected to the extent of proper valuation of the suit property
and deficiency in payment of court fees.
3.     I   have   considered   the   strenuous   submissions   of   the   learned
Advocate   for   the   petitioner   and   the   learned   Advocate   on   behalf   of
respondent Nos. 1 to 6 who are the original plaintiffs.   Reliance is
placed  upon  an  affidavit  filed  by  them.    Respondent   Nos.7  and  11
have   not   entered   an   appearance   despite   service   of   court   notice.
Respondent Nos. 9 and 10 have been deleted under the leave granted
by this Court on 29/07/2016.
4.     Upon considering the strenuous submissions of the litigating
sides and on perusing the record available, there is no dispute that
the 6 respondents herein preferred Spl.Civil Suit No.70/2011 seeking
the   relief   of   mandatory   injunction   or   alternatively,   partition   and
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
separate possession in respect of the property mentioned in Schedule
the plaintiffs, declaration to the effect that the sale deed executed by
defendant   No.1   in   favour   of   defendant   No.3   (the   petitioner   herein),
bearing Day Book No.4301/2011 dated 30/08/2011 is not binding on
connection with the suit property.
5.     There is no dispute that plaintiff No.4 Jyoti is the daughter in
law of defendant No.1 whose husband Sunil has passed away.   It is
equally undisputed that the suit property includes 2 vacant plots and
one house property.
6.     The first issue raised by the petitioner is that
Section 6(v)
of the
Maharashtra Court Fees Act would be applicable in this case.   The
Trial Court, by the impugned order, has concluded that
Section 6(vii)
would   become   applicable   which   means   that   even   the   explanation
thereto would have its effect.
7.     There can be no dispute that
Section 6(v)
would apply to suits
where land, houses and gardens are a subject matter and the claim
put forth is purely for seeking possession of the said suit properties.
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
Section 6(vii)
pertains to a suit for partition and separate possession
family property.  The explanation there below deals with properties in
land revenue for the purpose of agriculture.     It is undisputed that
the two vacant plots are not such portions of land that are assessed
to land revenue for the purpose of agriculture.  They are NA plots.  In
this   backdrop,   the   conclusion   of   the   Trial   Court   in   the   impugned
order   that
Section  6(vii)
would   be  applicable,  cannot   be  termed   as
being perverse or erroneous.
8.     The other issue that survives in this petition is with regard to
whether plaintiff No.4 can be subjected to payment of court fees.  The
Trial Court, by the impugned order, has concluded that plaintiff No.4
is exempted from payment of court fees in the light of the GR dated
01/10/1994   and   23/03/2000   issued   by   the   State   of   Maharashtra
with   reference   to   the   Bombay   Court   Fees   Act,   1959   which   is   now
known as the
Maharashtra Court Fees Act
9.     It requires no debate that a lady litigant who is litigating in a
matrimonial dispute, would be exempted from the payment of court
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
fees even if it is in connection with maintenance or her property right
or violence or divorce.   It also requires no debate that the GR dated
23/03/2000   was   introduced   by   the   State,   having   a   clarificatory
character, for describing property disputes to be exempted from the
exemption granted under the first GR dated 01/10/1994 in relation
to women litigants.
10.    The   learned   Advocate   for   the   petitioner   has   relied   upon   the
judgment   of   this   Court   in   the   matter   of
Prabhakar   Dayaram
Narkhede Vs. Vijaya
alias Shakuntala G. Chaudhari [2007(2) Mh.L.J.
175] and Shehala
Pramod Desai Vs.NIL [
2012 (5) MH.L.J 340 = 2012
AIR (Bom) 168 =   2012(5) Bom.C.R.875]  to support his contention that
save   and   except   a   matrimonial   dispute,   a   lady   litigant   who   is
litigating   for   partition   and   separate   possession   so   as   to   earn   her
dispute,  cannot   be  exempted from  payment  of  court   fees.
He  also
relies upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the matter
of Girish Kanaiyalal Munshi Vs. Nil [AIR 2008 Bombay 136]. Learned
Advocate for the original plaintiffs has relied upon the judgment in
the matter of  Kiran Chunnilal Talreja and another Vs. Ramchandra
Devidas Talreja and another [2009 (Supp.1) Bom.C.R. 567].
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
11.    It   is   clear   that   the   judgments   delivered   in   the   matter   of
Prabhakar,  Shehla  and  Kiran
(supra)   have   been   delivered   by   the
learned   Single   Judges   of   this   Court.
I   am   relying   upon   the   view
taken by the learned Division Bench in the matter of Girish (supra),
wherein   the   assistance   of   the   Advocate   General   of   the   State   of
Maharashtra was taken.
12.    For   better   appreciation   of   the   matter   in   hand,   I   deem   it
appropriate to reproduce paragraph Nos. 8 to 15 from Girish (supra)
hereunder :-
"8. Referring to the explanatory Notification of 23/03/2000, the
Learned Single Judge D.K.Deshmukh, J. held that:
a) The purpose of this 2nd Notification was to define the term
'property disputes'.
b) The Notifications issued by the government on 1/10/1994 and
23/03/2000   are   instances   of   conditional   legislation   and   not
delegated legislation. This is because when an Act of Parliament
gives power to the Executive to bring an act into force or to the
Government to exempt person or property from operation of the
enactment,   the   power   conferred   in   such   a   situation   on   the
Executive   or   the   Government   is   an   instance   of   conditional
legislation.
c) In view of the above, it is pertinent to note the judgment of the
Constitution Bench of  the  Supreme  Court  in the  case  of  Jalan
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
Trading   Co.   Pvt.  Ltd.   v.   Mill   Mazdoor  Sabha
,   wherein   it   was
held   that   the   power   bestowed   upon   the   Government   under
Section 36
of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, of exempting an
establishment or a class of establishments from operation of the
Act, amounts to conditional legislation and is not void.
d) The Learned Single Judge held that as the two Notifications
are pieces of conditional legislation, the well settled principles of
interpretation of statutes would apply to them.
e)   The   Learned   Single   Judge   further   held,   that   insofar   as   the
principles governing the interpretation of a Notification granting
exemption from payment of tax or fee is concerned, they have
been
laid down by
the Supreme Court in its judgment in the case
Union   of   India   and   Ors.   v.   Wood   Papers   Ltd.   and   Anr.
wherein the Court observed that when the question is whether a
subject falls in the notification or in the exemption clause, then it
being the nature of exception, is to be construed strictly against
the subject, but once the doubt about the applicability is lifted
and the subject falls in the notification, then it calls for a wider
and liberal construction.
f) In view of the aforementioned judgment, the Learned Single
Judge, in the present case, held that when the question to be
decided   is   whether   a   litigant   falls   in   the   category   which   is
entitled   to   exemption,   the   Notification   ought   to   be   strictly
construed   since   it   is   in   the   nature   of   an   exception   made   to   a
general rule.
g) The Learned Single Judge concurred with the view expressed
by  the   Supreme  Court  in  the  case   of  Commissioner   of  Income
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
Tax, Gujarat v. Cellulose Products of India Ltd.
, so far as the
principle governing interpretation of fiscal statutes in concerned,
and   observed   that   a   perusal   of   the   definition   of   'property
disputes' as found in the 2nd Notification dated 23/03/2000 is
so clear that it does not admit any doubt and therefore there is
no question of placing any interpretation or construction on that
provision.
9. The Learned Single Judge Deshmukh,J. further observed that:
a) While holding an enquiry to find out what kind of litigation
filed by women litigants is exempted from payment of court fees,
it is necessary to examine the situation existing at the time when
the 2nd Notification dated 23/03/2000 was issued.
b) This Notification was issued as a result of various judgments
of this Court wherein the term 'property disputes' was given a
wide interpretation.
c) It is well established that the Notification dated 23/03/2000
is an amendment Notification. In view of this, it is imperative to
note to the judgment of the Privy Council in the case of D. R.
Fraser & Co. Ltd v. The Minister of National Revenue AIR (36)
1949,   wherein   the   Privy   Council   observed   that,   'When   an
amending   act   alters   the   language   of   the   principal   statute,   the
alteration must be taken to have been made deliberately'.
d) Therefore the 2nd Notification was issued with the intention of
changing   the   then   existing   situation   and   if   despite   the
amendment   the   situation   continues   to   be   the   same,   the
amendment would be an exercise in futility.
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
10. In the case of Bipin Dalpatbhai Shah v. Vasantben Rasilal
Zaveri 2001(4) All MR 1, the Learned Single Judge referred to the
liberal interpretations given to the Notification of 1/10/1994 by
K.G. Shah J, Gokhale J. and Nijjar J. in matters decided prior to
23/03/2000   (ie.   The   date   on   which   the   2nd   Notification   was
issued) and held that in relation to a testamentary petition filed
by a woman, she would be remitted from payment of court fees
insofar as she is the beneficiary in the estate of the deceased.
11. It is vital to note that the learned Single Judge in the case of
Bipin Dalpatbhai Shah v. Vasantben Rasilal Zaveri did not take
into   consideration   the   change   that   the   Government   wanted   to
bring   about   by   issuing   the   2nd   Notification   and   that   the
decisions   that   were   relied   on   in   the   judgment   were   ones
rendered   before   the   2nd   Notification   was   issued   and   as   such
should not have been relied upon after the 2nd Notification was
issued.
12.
Ramila Rajnikant Kilachand v. Harsh R. Kilachand and
Ors.
2004(6) Bom. C.R. 75, the Learned Single Judge held that;
i)   The   term   'matrimonial   matters'   as   referred   to   in   the
Government Notification dated 23/03/2000, includes even such
a dispute wherein the husband may not be a party.
ii) The terms 'arising out of' and 'concerning' matrimonial matters
are used not with the intention to restrict but with that if giving a
wider meaning to the same.
deceased husband, she is entitled to claim compensation from
payment of court fees as such a suit falls within the ambit of
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
'matrimonial matters'
13. The Learned Single Judge D.K.Deshmukh.J. in the present
case,   perused   through   the   aforementioned   judgment   and   held
that:
i) In order for a dispute to be qualified as one 'arising out of or
concerning   matrimonial   matters',   the   dispute   must   necessarily
be between parties who are parties to the marriage.
ii)   In   the   absence   of   the   definition   of   'matrimonial   matters'   in
either the  Notification or the
Bombay Court Fees  Act
(1959), a
useful  reference  may be  made to the  explanation of the  same
appearing in Sub-
section 1
Section 7
of the Family Courts Act,
a perusal of which makes it clear that, all matters in relation to
which the Family Court has jurisdiction, are matters arising out
of disputes between the parties to the marriage.
14.   With  reference   to   a  petition   filed  for  probate   of  a   Will,  the
Learned Single Judge D.K. Deshmukh,J. was of the view that:
a) Such a petition is never a petition in relation to any dispute
concerning   any   property   but   is   in   relation   to   the   validity   or
otherwise   of   a   Will   and   can   by   no   stretch   of   imagination   be
termed   as   a   petition   'arising   out   of   or   concerning   matrimonial
matters'
b) A testator can name any person, who may or may not be his
widow or his relative, as an executor of his Will and therefore
merely   because   in   a   Will   the   widow   has   been   named   as   the
executor,   would   not   entitle   her   to   exemption   from   payment   of
court fees.
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
c) In a probate petition, a dispute  will  arise  only if  somebody
files a caveat, however at the time when liability to pay court
fees   arises   in   a   probate   petition,   nobody   can   say   with   any
amount of certainty that a dispute will arise in that petition, and
hence a petition filed by a woman for probate of a Will, will not
enjoy exemption from payment of court fees.
d)   Contrary   to   the   argument   advanced   before   this   Court   on
behalf   of   the   petitioners,   that   a   petition   for   probate   of   a   Will
arises out of matrimony, such a petition filed under the
Indian
Succession Act
actually arises out of death and not matrimony.
15. The Learned Single judge D.K.Deshmukh,J. disagreed with
the view taken by the Learned Single Judge in the case of Dr.
(Mrs.)  Geeta S. Naik, dated  26/06/1996, wherein it  was  held
that a woman litigant is exempted from payment of court fees for
a   petition   filed   to   protect   her   property   right.   In   view   of   the
aforementioned   decision,   the   Learned   Single   Judge
D.K.Deshmukh,J. in the present case held that:
a) The Learned Single judge in the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Geeta S.
Naik,   made   no   attempt   to   examine   the   intention   of   the
Government by reading into the operative part of the Notification
and   in   the   circumstances,   when   construing   the   words   of   the
Notification   on   their   plain   simple   meaning   did   not   lead   to   an
absurd   or   unreasonable   interpretation,   there   existed   no
necessity to refer to the preamble of the said Notification.
b) Furthermore, the Learned Single Judge in the aforesaid case
ought to have considered that it is a settled law that in a probate
petition, right to property or title to any property is never decided
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
by the testamentary Court. This view has also been upheld by
the Supreme Court in the case if
Ishwardeo Narain Sing v. Smt.
Kamla Devi
AIR 1954.
c) A perusal of another judgment  of the Supreme Court in the
case of
Delhi Development Authority v. Mrs. Vijaya Gurshaney
and Anr.
wherein the Supreme Court held that a testamentary
Court   is   only   concerned   with   finding   out   whether   or   not   the
testator   executed   the   testamentary   instrument   of   his   free   will
and   grant   of   a   probate   or   Letters   of   Administration   does   not
confer   title   to   property,   clearly   elucidates   the   fact   that   in   a
probate   petition,   there   can   never   be   any   dispute   relating   to
property but only a question relating to the validity of the Will."
13.    While dealing  with the issue, as to whether  the definition or
meaning of a 'matrimonial dispute' could be expanded to include all
matrimonial matters, the Advocate General was called upon to make
his submissions before the learned Division Bench.  His submissions
are reproduced in paragraph No.25 which read as under :-
"25. As per our request, the learned Advocate General Mr.Ravi
Kadam,   very   ably   assisted   the   Court,   with   regard   to
interpretation of the aforesaid Government Notification as under:
a) It was as a result of various decisions of this Court wherein
the term 'property disputes' was given a wide interpretation, that
the   Government   issued   the   explanatory   Notification   dated
23/03/2000,   as   an   amendment   to   the   Notification   dated
1/10/1994, to clarify that the words 'property disputes' would be
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
restricted   to   those   arising   out   of   and   concerning   matrimonial
matters.
b) Thus it is clear that the intention of the 2nd Notification was to
change   the   then   existing   Notification,   and   if   despite   the
amendment, the situation continues to remain the same, then the
amendment would be an exercise in futility.
c) Therefore it is imperative that the Notification and in particular
the words 'arising out of and concerning matrimonial matters' be
construed literally in their clear and ordinary meaning so that the
ambit of the words 'property disputes' is not interpreted in such a
wide   manner   which   would   be   contrary   to   the   intention   of   the
Government behind issuing the Notification.
d) In reference to the judgment of Dharmadhikari J. in the case of
Ramila   Rajnikant   Kilachand   v.   Harsh   R.   Kilachand   and   Ors.
(Supra
),   relied   upon   by   the   Petitioners,   the   Learned   Advocate
General stated that:
i)   The   words   'matrimonial   matters'   arising   in   the   Government
Notification   of   23/03/2000,   which   connote   only   cases   of
disputes between the parties to a marriage, cannot be replaced
by the wider term 'matrimonial relationship'.
ii) The Learned Single Judge erred in interpreting the law viz. the
Notification, in a manner as it 'ought to be' and not what 'it is'
e) Lastly, petitions relating to testamentary matters arise not out
of a matrimonial matter, but out of death.
f) In the circumstances petitions filed by a widow for probate of
her deceased husband's Will, will fall outside the purview of the
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
Notifications granting exemption from payment of court fees."
14.    After   considering   the   rival   contentions   of   the   litigating   sides
and the submissions put forth by the Advocate General, the learned
Division Bench concluded the issue in paragraph No.26, which reads
as under :-
"26.   After   hearing   the   learned   Senior   Counsel   Dr.Tulzapurkar
and the learned Advocate General and in light of the extensive
arguments forwarded on behalf of the Petitioner and the State,
the various judgments of this Court regarding the exemption from
payment   of   court   fees   by   women   litigants   and   several   other
relevant judgments of this Court and the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
the following issues can be clearly outlined.
A)   The   intention   of   the   Government   behind   issuing   the   2nd
Notification 23rd March,2000.
a) The Notification dated 23/03/2000, which qualified 'property
disputes' as disputes arising out of and concerning matrimonial
matters, was issued as a consequence of various judgments of
this Court wherein the term 'property disputes' was given a wide
interpretation.
b)   The   Notification   dated   23/03/2000   is   in   the   form   of   an
amendment Notification. In view of this, it is pertinent to note the
reference made by Deshmukh J. in his judgment of 4/06/2007,
to the judgment of the Privy Council in the case of D. R. Fraser &
Co.   Ltd   v.   The   Minister   of   National   Revenue   AIR   (36)   1949,
wherein   the   Privy   Council   has   observed   that,   'When   an
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
amending   act   alters   the   language   of   the   principal   statute,   the
alteration must be taken to have been made deliberately'.
c) The 2nd Notification was issued with the intention of changing
the   then   existing   situation   and   if   despite   the   amendment   the
situation continues to be the same, the amendment would be an
exercise in futility.
d) Hence the intention of the Government behind issuing the 2nd
Notification is amply clear from plain simple interpretation of the
words   of   the   Notification   themselves,   that   the   term   'property
disputes' would be restricted to only those concerning or arising
out  of  matrimonial  matters  and  would  hence  exclude  petitions
filed for probate of Wills.
B)   Interpreting   it   widely   would   go   beyond   the   intent   of   the
Government
a)   Notwithstanding   the   fact   that   the   Notification   exempting   a
certain class of women from payment of court fees is a beneficial
piece of legislation, an extended meaning to the words 'property
disputes',   would   tantamount   to   indulging   in   exercise   of
legislation Page 1539 in the garb of interpretation. A similar view
was   taken   by   Palkar   J.   in   his   judgment   in   the   case   of   Smt
Ashabai w/o Shivaji Shiral and Anr v. The Executive Engineer,
MSEB 1999(2) Bom CR 194.
b) A petition for probate of a Will is neither a petition in relation to
any   'property   dispute'   nor   does   it   'arise   out   of   or   concern   a
matrimonial matter.'
c) A petition for probate of a Will is never a petition in relation to
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
any   dispute   concerning   any   property   but   is   in   relation   to   the
validity   or   otherwise   of   a   Will.   The   judgment   of   the   Supreme
Court in the case of  Delhi Development Authority v. Mrs. Vijaya
Gurshaney   and   Anr.   AIR   2003   SC   3669,   which   Deshmukh   J.
referred to in his judgment of 4/06/2007 clearly brings to light
the   aforementioned   view,   wherein   it   was   held   that   a
testamentary Court is only concerned with finding out whether
or not the testator executed the testamentary instrument of his
free will and grant of a probate or Letters of Administration does
not confer title to property.
d)   As   rightly   contended   by   the   Learned   Advocate   General,
Mr.Ravi Kadam, on behalf of the state, testamentary cases do
not   arise   out   of   matrimonial   matters   but   rather   arise   out   of
'death'.
C)   Furthermore   it   is   pertinent   to   differentiate   between
matrimonial   matters   and   matrimonial   relationship   as   the   two
terms   are   not   synonymous   and   hence   the   term   'matrimonial
matters'   arising   in   the   Notification   of   23/03/2000   cannot   be
replaced by 'matrimonial relationship' so as to bring a petition
filed  by  a  widow   for  probate   of  her   deceased   husband's   Will,
within the ambit of the Notification.
D)   Lastly,   the   words   'property   dispute   arising   out   of   or
concerning matrimonial matters' should be given their plain and
simple meaning, that is, a dispute arising between parties to a
marriage,  (attention  may  be  brought   to  the  reference   made   by
Deshmukh. J. to the  Family Courts Act  Sub-
section 1
Section 7
, to
elucidate   the   meaning   of   the   term   'matrimonial   matters')   and
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
should therefore exclude testamentary petitions wherein not only
is   there   an   absence   of   a   dispute,   other   than   in   cases   when
somebody files a caveat, it is not a matter between two parties
to a marriage."
15.    Learned Advocate for the plaintiffs, in the matter in hand, has
contended that since the husband of plaintiff No.4 has passed away,
her claim for partition and separate possession can be considered to
be a matrimonial dispute since she would not have been required to
litigate   if   her   husband   would   have   been   alive   or   would   have
an answer in the conclusions of the learned Division Bench in the
Girish   Case  (supra)   in   paragraph   Nos.26(B)(d),   (C)   and   (D).     It   is
concluded that even testamentary cases with regard to the death of
the   husband   would   not   come   within   the   meaning   of   'matrimonial
dispute'.
16.    Considering the law laid down in Girish case (supra) and which
was not cited before the Trial Court thereby depriving the Trial Court
of proper assistance by the litigating sides, the conclusion of the Trial
Court that plaintiff No.4 would be exempted from payment of court
fees, deserves to be set aside.
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d
17.    As such, this petition is partly allowed.   The impugned order
dated 08/10/2015 is partly set aside only to the extent of plaintiff
No.4 Jyoti who would now be liable to pay court fees on the claims
put forth in the suit.   Application Exh.49 is therefore partly allowed
to that extent and Rule is made partly absolute accordingly.
( RAVINDRA V. GHUGE, J.)
khs/JAN.2018/1210-d