Title: Vishal Pipes Limited vs Bhavya Pipe Industry on 3 June, 2022
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/129126895/
Court: Unknown
Date: Unknown

================================================================================

Delhi High Court
Vishal Pipes Limited vs Bhavya Pipe Industry on 3 June, 2022
Author:
Prathiba M. Singh
Bench:
Prathiba M. Singh
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on: 10th March, 2022
Date of decision: 3rd June, 2022
+                FAO-IPD 1/2022 & CM APPLs. 12-14/2022
VISHAL PIPES LIMITED                                     ..... Appellant
Through:   Mr. S.K. Bansal, Mr. Rishi Bansal,
Mr. Ajay Amitabh Suman, Mr.
Pankaj Kumar, Advocates (M:
9990389539)
versus
BHAVYA PIPE INDUSTRY                         ..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Akhil Sibal, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Nikhil Chawla, Ms. Asavari Jain,
Advocates assisting the court
(9765097954)
Ms. Swathi Sukumar, Amicus Curiae
Mr. Naveen Nagarjuna & Ms. Tarini
Sahai, Advocates (M: 9632196700)
Ms. Rajeshwari H. and Ms. Sugandh
Shahi, Advocates assisting the court.
Mr. Dushyant Mahant, Advocate
assisting the Court
Mr. Devesh Vashishtha, Advocate
assisting the court.
Mr. Sidharth Chopra, Advocate
assisting the court
CORAM:
JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
JUDGMENT
Prathiba M. Singh, J.
I.     BACKGROUND
1.     The present is an appeal challenging the order dated 28 th January,
2022 passed by the ld. ADJ-03, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi in the suit
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                          Page 1 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
bearing TM 1/2022 titled
Vishal Pipes Limited v. Bhavya Pipe Industry
which is a suit seeking permanent injunction against infringement of
up, rendition of accounts, etc. for usage of the trademark 'BPI', which is
stated to be similar to the Appellant's/Plaintiff's (hereinafter "Plaintiff")
trademark 'VPL INDIA'. The grievance of the Plaintiff was that the ld. ADJ
had refused to grant an ex parte order of injunction and had also failed to
appoint a Local Commissioner for seizure of the alleged infringing goods.
2.     When the matter was listed on 2nd March, 2022, the Court had noticed
that while trademark disputes are being adjudicated at the District Level by
Commercial Courts, the present order had been passed by the ld. ADJ who
was not designated as a Commercial Court. Upon enquiring the reason for
the same, the Court was informed that the suit is valued below Rs.3,00,000/-
and thus, in view of the pecuniary provisions in the
Commercial Courts Act,
(hereinafter "CCA"), where the 'specified value' for 'commercial
disputes' is 3,00,000/-, read with
Section 134
the Trade Marks Act, 1999
(hereinafter "
Trademarks Act
") where a suit relating to trademarks is to be
filed and heard only by a District Court, the suit was marked to a District
Judge, not designated as a Commercial Court. The logical corollary of this is
that the provisions of the CCA also are not made applicable to such a suit.
The Court found this situation to be quite peculiar and, accordingly, passed
the following order on 2nd March, 2022:
"10.      Another peculiar question has also arisen in
this suit. It is noticed that the matter arises out of an
order passed by the ld. ADJ-03 in the Patiala House
Courts Complex, Delhi, who is not designated as a
"commercial court". On the previous date being 28 th
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 2 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
February, 2021, this Court raised a query as to
whether a District Court which is not designated as a
"commercial court" can hear IPR matters in view of
the provisions of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015
and
the
Trademarks Act, 1999
11.       Today, Mr. Bansal, ld. Counsel, has made his
submissions in this regard. Mr. Sidharth Chopra, ld.
counsel who is present in Court, has also made his
submissions. Ms. Swathi Sukumar, ld. Counsel, who
was appointed as Amicus Curiae on the previous date,
has also partly made her submissions.
12.       Considering the importance of the matter, Mr.
Akhil Sibal, ld. Sr. Counsel who is present in Court,
has also been requested to examine this issue and
assist the Court on the next date. Other counsels, who
wish to make submissions, are also permitted to make
submissions in this regard."
3.      The question that arises for consideration in this matter is as to
whether IPR suits filed before District Courts, valued below Rs. 3 lakhs,
ought to be listed before and adjudicated upon by the District Judges
(Commercial) under the provisions of the CCA or by District Judges (non-
Commercial), as normal civil suits.
4.      Owing to the importance of the issue that has arisen before the Court
for consideration, various counsels as also the Amicus Curiae have made
their submissions and filed written notes of arguments.
II.     SUBMISSIONS OF THE LD. COUNSEL FOR THE PLAINTIFF
5.      On behalf of the Plaintiff, submissions were made by Mr. S.K.
Bansal, ld. counsel who represented the Plaintiff even before the District
Court. The same are as under:
• There are a large number of IPR matters that are valued below
Rs.3,00,000/- and placed before the ld. AJD (non-Commercial) for
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                             Page 3 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
adjudication. Various orders showing the pendency of such cases
before the ADJs are relied upon.
• Reliance is placed upon the provisions of the CCA, especially, the
definition of 'specified value' in
Section 2(c)(xvii)
read with
Section
which provides for determination of 'specified value'. In view of
these provisions, any suit which is valued below Rs.3,00,000/- cannot
be listed before or adjudicated upon by a Commercial Court. He
further relies upon the following decisions:
(i)      Soni Dave v. M/s Trans Asian Industries Expositions Pvt.
Ltd., AIR 2016 Del 186;
ii)     Fine Footwear v. Skechers U.S.A.
, 2019 (5) KarLJ 358;
(iii)    Bharat Bhogilal v. Leitz Tooling Systems India Pvt. Ltd., 2020
(82) PTC 458 (Bom); and
iv)     Kirloskar Aaf Limited v. American Air Filters Company Inc.
& Anr. [RFA No.1
of 2015, 25th September, 2018].
• On the basis of these submissions, it was urged that the suit ought to
be continued before the ld. ADJ (non-Commercial). However, he
submits that he would have no objection if the matter is heard by the
Commercial Court instead.
III.    SUBMISSIONS OF THE LD. AMICUS CURIAE
6.      Ms. Swathi Sukumar, ld. Amicus Curiae, has given a written note of
arguments and has also made her submissions as under:
• For the Commercial Court to exercise jurisdiction, the twin test of
pecuniary and subject-matter jurisdiction has to be satisfied. This
position has been upheld by various decisions such as:
(i)
Kirloskar
(supra);
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 4 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(ii)
Fine Footwear
(supra);
(iii)     Bharat Bhogilal (supra);
iv)      Neelkanth Healthcare Pvt. Ltd. v. Neelkanth Healthchem
AIR 2018 Raj 67, AIR 2018 Raj 67; and
v)       Ambala Sarabhai Enterprises Limited v. K S Infraspace LLP
and Anr.
, 2020 (15) SCC 585.
• While, initially, prescribing the 'specified value' of commercial suits
at Rs.1 crore, and thereafter, reducing the same to Rs.3,00,000/- vide
the
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts (Amendment) Act, 2018
(hereinafter "2018 Amendment"), the Legislature was conscious of
the value of the dispute and, thus, the same cannot be ignored.
• Reliance is placed upon
Section 134
of the Trademarks Act and
provisions of the CCA to submit that the provisions of the two statutes
ought to be harmoniously construed to arrive at the forum which will
have jurisdiction in such matters. Thus, the definition of 'specified
value' cannot be ignored.
• In this endeavor, the Court ought to examine the question as to
whether a particular suit has been valued arbitrarily. The Delhi High
Court has clearly held in
Subhashini Malik v. S.K. Gandhi & Ors.
(2016) 233 DLT 83, that the plaintiff being the dominus litis has a
choice to choose the forum and remedy. However, the valuation of the
IPR suits below Rs.3 lakhs, has led to a situation where the plaintiff is
not only exercising the right to choose the Court before which the
matter would be listed, but is also avoiding the rigors of the
substantial provisions of the CCA. According to Ms. Sukumar, the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 5 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
CCA is not merely a procedural law as various substantial provisions
may affect the manner in which 'commercial disputes' are
adjudicated.
• This raises the issue of two competing factors: (i) the twin test of
pecuniary and subject matter jurisdiction that has to be satisfied by a
suit for applicability of CCA; and (ii) public policy considerations
which prohibit forum-shopping and habitual undervaluation of suits.
• Notably, the repercussions of undervaluation of suits are high and it
would defeat the very purpose of the CCA. Thus, the Court ought to
lift the veil on the valuation made by plaintiff in such matters and the
plaintiff's right is not unfettered.
• In light of the above, it is clear that the valuation ought not to be
whimsical or arbitrary and if it is, then the Court ought to intervene.
• Ms. Sukumar, places reliance on the following decisions to support
her submissions that the Court is entitled to examine the valuation and
the manner in which it may do so:
i)       Meenakshisundaram Chettiar v. Venkatachalam Chettiar
(1980) 1 SCC 616;
ii)      Abdul Hamid Shamsi v. Abdul Majid
, (1988) 2 SCC 575;
(iii)     Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. v. All India Bharat Sanchar
Nigam Executives' Association (Regd.) & Ors. (2006) 130
DLT 195; and
(iv)      Lalit Babbar v. Ramson Prime Technologies Pvt. Ltd.,
[CS(Comm.) 1857/2020, decided on 23rd December, 2020].
• The guidance for estimating the value of the suit, may be drawn from
the CCA. Under
Section 12(1)(d)
of the CCA, where the relief sought
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 6 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
in a suit, appeal or application relates to any intangible right, the
market value of the intangible right is to be looked at. Thus, the
valuation of a suit in intellectual property matters can be made more
stringent, by requiring the plaintiff to furnish information on the
market value of the right.
• Further, in the case of trademarks, by a mere assessment of the period
for which the brand has been used, the Court can assess the market
value of the intangible right. Similarly, royalty rates may be required
to be disclosed along with total expected royalty amount.
7.      Accordingly, the ld. Amicus submits that by lifting the veil on
valuation, the threat of undervaluation and forum shopping can be mitigated
and IPR disputes can be placed before the concerned Court accordingly.
III.    SUBMISSIONS OF LD. COUNSELS ASSISTING THE COURT
A.      Submissions of Mr. Akhil Sibal, Ld. Sr. Counsel
8.      Mr. Akhil Sibal, ld. Sr. Counsel, has also made submissions as under:
• First, the 'specified value' under the CCA cannot be ignored. There is
no repugnancy between the provisions of the IPR statutes and the
CCA.
• However, since in Delhi the pecuniary jurisdiction of the District
Courts is Rs.3 lakhs and above, and the same also matches with the
'specified value' for the 'commercial disputes' at the District Court
level, the IPR disputes which have to anyway be listed only before the
District Judges, may be placed before the District Judge
(Commercial). This is in view of the fact that under
Article 236
of the
Constitution, the District Judge includes the Judge of a City Civil
Court, ADJ, etc. Thus, both the ADJ (non-Commercial) and ADJ
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 7 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(Commercial), would constitute the District Court. Further, as held in
Kesavarapu Venkateswarlu & Ors. v. Sardharala Satanaryana &
Ors., AIR 1957 AP 49, a Superior Court can exercise jurisdiction in
respect of a dispute maintainable before an Inferior Court, as the
Superior Court would not lack inherent jurisdiction, as long as it has
subject-matter jurisdiction.
• Consequently, both District Judges - Commercial and non-
Commercial - have subject matter jurisdiction over IPR disputes, but
neither has the requisite pecuniary jurisdiction as the pecuniary
jurisdiction of District Courts, even for ordinary civil suits, starts at
Rs. 3 lakhs.
• Therefore, since ADJs have to hear IPR matters irrespective of their
value, administratively, the matters can be listed before the ADJs
holding Commercial Courts.
• He underscores his submissions with the caveat that Delhi stands in a
peculiar position to use this interpretation, in as much as in case of
IPR suits valued below Rs. 3 lakhs, there are no District Judges/ADJs
who have the pecuniary jurisdiction to hear the same.
9.      He thus, relies upon the decision in
Subhashini Malik
(supra), to
highlight the difference between lack of pecuniary jurisdiction and lack of
inherent jurisdiction and to argue that clearly in the context of Notification
131 and the 'specified value' under the CCA, there would be no harm in IPR
matters being listed before District Judges (Commercial).
B.      Submissions of Mr. Rishi Bansal, ld. Counsel
10.     Mr. Rishi Bansal, ld. counsel, submits that IPR disputes are currently
being adjudicated upon by both Commercial and non-Commercial Courts at
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 8 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
the District Court level.
11.     He relies upon the various notifications issued by the High Court in
this regard. Mr. Bansal also places reliance on the meeting of the State Court
Management Systems Committee (hereinafter "SCMSC") of the Delhi High
Court, which was held on 4th February, 2020.
C.      Submissions of Mr. Sidharth Chopra, ld. Counsel
12.     Mr. Sidharth Chopra, ld. counsel, submits as under:
Section 15
of the CPC, which provides that every suit shall be
instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it, is
merely a rule of procedure and not of jurisdiction. Therefore, it would
not oust the jurisdiction of higher Courts (such as Commercial
Courts), which have substantive jurisdiction over the subject matter.
• In view of this legal position, Mr. Chopra, ld. Counsel, emphasizes,
the fact that in IPR cases, the policy decision of the Legislature is to
have the same adjudicated upon by the District Courts, irrespective of
a lower pecuniary value. To support this contention, Mr. Chopra relies
upon the various notifications and provisions of the IPR statutes.
According to him, pecuniary value of an IPR suit is irrelevant.
• Reliance is also placed upon
Dashrath B. Rathod v. Fox Star Studios
India Pvt. Ltd.
(2017 SCC OnLine Bom 345), where the Bombay
High Court has clearly held that monetary value is inconsequential in
an IPR dispute.
• An analogy is drawn with arbitration cases relying upon
Rahisuddin
v. Gambit Leasing & Finance Pvt. Ltd.
, 2011 (176) DLT 696, where
the Court held that a petition under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 ought to be filed before a Court not inferior to
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 9 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
a District Court in terms of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration Act.
• He also points out that in most IPR statutes like patents/designs, when
a cancellation/revocation of patent/design is sought, the matters are
automatically listed before the High Court irrespective of pecuniary
valuation.1
• Further, in so far as the 'specified value' under the CCA is concerned,
the important features of the provisions of the CCA have been
considered by the Supreme Court in
Ambalal Sarabhai
(supra).
seeks to distinguish the decision in Soni Dave (supra) by arguing that
the said judgment was in the context of immovable properties not
used in trade or commerce. Since not all categories of immovable
properties constitute 'commercial disputes', the Court had to
adjudicate as to which kind of cases would be construed as
'commercial disputes'. The said decision would not be applicable in
case of IPR disputes.
• In Super Cassettes Industries Pvt. Ltd. M/s Goldy Industries Pvt.
Ltd. [CS(COMM) 775/2016, decided on 17th August, 2016], the
Court was merely interpreting the first proviso to
Section 7
of the
CCA as to whether suits, which are valued below the 'specified
value', ought to be permitted to be filed in the High Court or not. At
the time of the said case, the 2018 Amendment reducing the pecuniary
value of the 'commercial disputes' from Rs.1 crore to Rs.3 lakhs was
yet to be introduced. Therefore, the Super Cassettes (supra) decision
would be inapplicable in adjudicating the issue currently being
Section 22(4)
, Designs Act, 2000; Proviso to
Section 104
, Patents Act, 1970.
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                                     Page 10 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
decided by the Court.
• Allowing an interpretation contrary to the above submissions, and the
manner in which IPR suits are now sought to be adjudicated in two
parallel streams, one under the CCA and one under
the CPC
, would
be improper and contrary to the intention behind the enactment of the
CCA. The plaintiff ought not to be permitted to escape the rigorous of
the CCA by merely valuing the suit at less than Rs.3 lakhs in an
arbitrary and whimsical manner.
• Therefore, though the plaintiff has the right to value a suit in terms of
the Full Bench decision in
Subhashini Malik
(supra), since IPR
litigation is treated as a separate class of litigation, the plaintiff ought
not to be permitted to escape the rigors of the provisions of the CCA
simply due to valuation of the suit being below Rs. 3 lakhs.
• Reliance is placed upon the order passed by the Commercial Court in
Delhi in Lalit Babbar (supra) which held that the provisions of the
CCA have to be read harmoniously with the
Court Fees Act, 1870
(hereinafter "
Court Fees Act
") and the
Suits Valuation Act, 1887
(hereinafter "
Suits Valuation Act
").
13.     Therefore, Mr. Chopra, ld. Counsel, submits that all IPR disputes,
irrespective of their 'specified value' should be adjudicated by Commercial
Courts, owing to the object and purpose of IPR statutes and CCA.
D.      Submissions of Ms. Rajeshwari, ld. Counsel
14.     Ms. Rajeshwari, ld. counsel, submits that the intention of the CCA is
expeditious disposal of 'commercial disputes'. She submits as under:
• At the outset, she has reiterated the twin test argument made by other
counsels, as also upheld in
Ambalal Sarabhai
(supra). As held in
the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                Page 11 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
said decision
, the 'specified value' under
Section 2(i)
of the CCA,
shall mean the value of the subject matter in respect of a suit,
determined as per
Section 12
of the CCA.
• She further relies upon Commercial Aviation & Travel Company v.
Vimani Pannalal, (1988) SCC 423, to argue that the plaintiff has the
freedom to make a reasonable assessment and value the suit, but the
same cannot be arbitrary.
• In
Kalla Yadagiri v. Kotha Bal Reddy
, (1999) 1 ALD 222 (FB), the
Andhra Pradesh High Court has held that the value of the subject
matter of the suit would be the value of the relief claimed. The said
decision reads as under:
"25. As noted above, clause (i) of
Section 2
of the Act
defines "Specified Value", in relation to a commercial
dispute, shall mean the value of the subject matter in
respect of a suit as determined in accordance with
section 12
[which shall not be less than three lakh
rupees] or such higher value, as may be notified by the
Central Government".
Section 12
provides for criteria
for valuation of the suit, application or appeal for the
purpose of the Act.
26. A matter will fall under the jurisdiction of the
Commercial Court or the Commercial Division of the
High Court on the following factors:-
(i) it shall be a commercial dispute within the meaning
of Section 2(1)(c) of the Act; and
(ii) such commercial disputes are of a specified value
as per
Section 2(i)
of the Act."
• In Soni Dave (supra), the Court has held that
Section 12
of the CCA
has to be read harmoniously with the
Court Fees Act and Suits
Valuation Act
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 12 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
• While the above decisions provide for valuation, basis the reliefs
claimed, under
Section 12
of the CCA, the market value of the subject
matter would also be relevant.
• Such valuation of relief along with market value estimation, can be
done using various approaches including income approach, economic
benefits, cash flows, future profits, etc. Upon undertaking such
valuation, it would be clear that in IPR cases, it is highly unlikely that
any relief can be valued below Rs. 3 lakhs. Thus, such suits would
should automatically be filed and listed before the Commercial
Courts.
•   In any event, the question of 'specified value' ought not to be given
so much importance so as to control the jurisdiction of the
Commercial Courts itself. A mischief ought not to be allowed by
having two sets of jurisdictions under two separate substantive
provisions, basis pecuniary value. Accordingly, IPR statues and CCA
provisions have to be harmoniously construed. In this regard,
Section
of the CCA has an overriding effect and therefore, the objective of
speedy resolution of disputes is to be given importance.
• Finally, even if Commercial Courts do not have jurisdiction over an
IPR dispute with a 'specified value' of less than Rs.3 lakhs, in
Ramamirtham v. Rama Film Service
, AIR 1951 Mad 93, it has been
held that while a Court does not have a jurisdiction to try a suit valued
above its maximum pecuniary jurisdiction, the converse may not be
true. Thus, a Court having jurisdiction to hear matters of a higher
pecuniary jurisdiction, for instance, a Commercial Court, can dispose
of a suit instituted in a court of a lower grade.
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 13 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
15.    In conclusion, she submits as under:
"Taking the above into account, it is proposed that
'commercial disputes' especially IPR disputes,
irrespective of their valuation, should be tried and
decided by a District Court [irrespective of the
pecuniary value of the suit] which is designated as
'Commercial Court' and not by courts that are not
designated as 'Commercial Court' subject to the plaint
specifying the "Specified Value" which the Plaintiff
may assign as per
section 7
of the Court Fees Act
1870."
E.     Submissions of Mr. Dushyant Mahant, ld. Counsel
16.    Mr. Mahant, ld. Counsel, traces the manner in which the pecuniary
jurisdiction of the High Court was increased from Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.20 lakhs
and thereafter, to Rs.2 crores in 2014. He submits that the 'specified value'
of a suit depends on the valuation given in the plaint. It is common
knowledge that the valuation in the plaint is based upon legal advice as is
clear from the verification clauses, which are signed by parties.
17.    Therefore, though the plaintiff may have the capacity to pay the Court
fee, based on legal advice that the suit may be valued below Rs.3 lakhs.
Thus, the decision on valuation is on most the occasions, of the counsel
rather than the litigant.
F.     Submissions of Mr. Devesh Vashishth, ld. Counsel
18.    Mr. Devesh Vashishth, ld. Counsel, submits that unlike in Delhi, in
Gurgaon, only if the valuation is above Rs.25 lakhs, the matter is placed
before an ADJ.
19.    He also submits that the manner in which the District Judges notified
as Commercial Courts deal with 'commercial disputes', is different from the
manner in which the same are dealt with by Non-Commercial Judges. Thus,
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 14 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
'commercial disputes' ought to be adjudicated only by Commercial Courts.
FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS
(i)    Nature of IPR Suits
20.    At the outset, it is pertinent to clarify that all suits concerning IPR
subject-matter are first, civil suits, and such IPR cases, with the enactment of
the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015
, would be now categorized as
'commercial disputes'. The said definition of 'commercial disputes' under
Section 2(c)(xvii)
of the CCA, reads as under:
"(c) "commercial dispute" means a dispute arising out
of--
xxx           xxx        xxx
(xvii) intellectual property rights relating to registered
design, domain names, geographical indications and
semiconductor integrated circuits;"
21.    Thus, all IPR suits are 'commercial disputes'.
22.    The second feature of IPR suits is that such suits are at the lowest, to
be instituted before the District Court, irrespective of their pecuniary value
as per
Section 134
of Trade Marks Act, 1999,
Section 62
Act, 1957,
Section 104
of the Indian Patents Act, 1970,
Section 22
of the
Indian Designs Act, 2000, and
Section 65
of the Protection of Plant
Varieties and Farmers Rights Act, 2001 (hereinafter collectively "IPR
Statutes").
23.    The purport of these special provisions in IPR statutes is that suits for
infringement, passing off, etc. shall be instituted only in a Court, not inferior
to a "District Court having jurisdiction". Thus, IPR suits, irrespective of the
pecuniary value ascribed to such suits, would have to be instituted in and
adjudicated upon by District Courts, and not before any other Courts below
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 15 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
District Courts. In effect therefore, District Judges/ADJs are the Courts of
the "lowest grade competent to try" IPR disputes.
(ii)       Jurisdiction in Case of IPR Disputes
24.        It is important to note the jurisdiction of Courts, in Delhi, with respect
to IPR disputes, prior to the enactment of the CCA and post such enactment.
25.        Under
Section 9
CPC, civil courts can try all civil suits.
Sections 15
CPC govern the place of suing for specific categories of suits. Insofar as
IPR suits are concerned, prior to the enactment of the CCA,
Section 20
CPC
governed the place where suits are generally filed. Additional fora were
provided in the respective IPR statutes, as a matter of convenience for the
plaintiff.2 Thus, even before the enactment of the CCA, IPR suits -
irrespective of their valuation - could only be filed before the District Court.
IPR cases were not filed before Sub-Judges, Civil Judges, etc.
26.        Accordingly, prior to 2015, there were only two fora where IPR cases
were being adjudicated:
(i)      District Judges/ADJs at the District level.
(ii)     High Courts having Original Jurisdiction depending upon
pecuniary value.
27.        On 23rd October, 2015, the CCA came into effect. Post the enactment
of the CCA, Commercial Courts were created at the District level and
Commercial Divisions were created in High Courts. However, in Delhi, the
following two fora continued to have jurisdiction over IPR disputes:
(i)      District Judges/ADJs at the District level.
(ii)     Commercial Division of the High Court having Original
For eg.
Section 134(2)
, Trademarks Act;
Section 62(2)
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                              Page 16 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
Jurisdiction depending upon pecuniary value. In the Delhi High
Court, the pecuniary jurisdiction is Rs.2 crores and above.3
28.       On 7th July, 2018, vide Order No.58/DHC/Gaz./G-1/VI.E.2(a)/2018
issued by the Delhi High Court (hereinafter "Order No.58"), all District
Judges in Delhi were notified as Commercial Courts. Thus, with this
notification, there was one common set of District Judges dealing with all
IPR matters. The unique feature was that the District Judges acted both a
Commercial Courts and non-Commercial Courts. Effectively therefore, the
same two fora as before, continued to have jurisdiction in 2018-2019, with
the same District Judges acting in different capacities:
(i)     All District Judges/ADJs at the District level (Commercial and
non-Commercial).
(ii)    Commercial Division of the High Court having Original
Jurisdiction depending upon pecuniary value.
29.       In 2019 vide Order No.60 dated 5th December, 2019, specific District
Judges in Delhi were notified as Commercial Courts. Therefore, since 2019
till now, there are three classes of Courts where IPR cases are being listed in
Delhi:
(i)     District Judges/ADJs (Non-Commercial)-Suits valued below
Rs.3 lakhs.
(ii)    District Judges/ADJs (Commercial)-Between Rs.3 lakhs till
Rs.2 crores.
(iii)   Commercial Division of the High Court (Original Jurisdiction)
-Above Rs.2 crores.
30.       This has now led to an anomalous situation, i.e., all IPR cases have to
Delhi High Court Amendment Act, 2015
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                 Page 17 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
be instituted only in District Courts, at the lowest, irrespective of the
pecuniary value. However, in view of the 'specified value' being below Rs.3
lakhs in certain suits, the said IPR suits are being heard and adjudicated
upon by a different set of District Judges, i.e., District Judge (non-
Commercial), under the provisions
of CPC
as applicable to civil disputes. In
effect, therefore, IPR suits, which are clearly 'commercial disputes' are
being made subject to different substantive and procedural laws, before
different Courts for adjudication.
31.     The question therefore arises:
"Can the District Judge (Commercial) entertain
and adjudicate IPR suits, which are valued below Rs.3 lakhs?"
32.     To answer the said question, it is first necessary to examine the
jurisdiction of Commercial Courts as per the CCA.
(iii)
Scheme of the Commercial Courts Act
33.     In 2015, the CCA was enacted, with the clear intent of providing
specialised procedures for expediting the adjudication of 'commercial
disputes'. The Preamble of the CCA reads as under:
An Act
to provide for the constitution of Commercial
Courts, [Commercial Appellate Courts,] Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the
High Courts for adjudicating commercial disputes of
specified value and matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto."
34.     A perusal of the above Preamble as also the settled legal position,
shows that the CCA would be applicable when the twin conditions of the
dispute being a 'commercial dispute' and having the 'specified value' are
satisfied. Concurrently, a plain reading of the 2018 Amendment, would
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                          Page 18 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
show that unless the 'specified value' of a 'commercial dispute' is at Rs.3
lakhs and above, the provisions of the CCA would not be applicable.
35.    However, it is now pertinent to analyze the object and purpose of the
enactment of the CCA and whether depriving certain IPR disputes from
being adjudicated under the CCA by Commercial Courts, would be in line
with the objectives of the CCA:
(i)       First, the CCA not merely provides for a procedure for
adjudication of 'commercial disputes', but with an intention of
expediting the resolution of 'commercial disputes', it has also
provided for various other substantive provisions to be
followed in 'commercial disputes'. Such procedures are case
management hearings, truncated trials, summary judgments,
etc. The following, as submitted by Mr. Dushyant K. Mahant,
ld. Counsel, is an illustration of the difference in the provisions
between
the CPC
and CCA, which is to enable the speeder
disposal of 'commercial disputes':
Sr. No.         Stage             District Judge           District Judge (non-
(Commercial)                Commercial)
1.     Pre-Institution   Mandatory               in    No such requirement.
Mediation         Commercial Courts
2.     Plaint            To be accompanied by          No     such           binding
Statement     of    Truth,    regulation                for
Documents in a particular     pleadings.
format, Declaration in
terms of Order XI
3.     Written           The time limit of 120         Can be filed beyond
Statement         days is mandatory in          statutory        period
nature    and    is   not     subject to the Hon'ble
condonable.                   Court being satisfied
of the "sufficient
cause"
4.     Documents         To be accompanied after       No          compliance
compliance of Order XI        required     and     an
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                     Page 19 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
for format and filing           exemption can be
everything available            sought     for   filing
documents available
presently, at later
stage/along       with
replication.
5.     Additional       In terms of Order XI, no        Can be filed at later
Documents        documents to be allowed         stage subject to the
to be filed later subject to    Hon'ble         Court
a finding that the              allowing the Order 7 R
documents were not              14 application.
available at the time of
execution of Plaint / WS.
O 7 R 14 is not available.
6.     Case             Introduced by the Act.          No such procedure.
Management
Hearing
7.     Summary       Expeditious disposal if            No such           procedure
Judgement     Court deems fit and save           provided.
time and cost.
8.     Cost          Entire litigation cost             Subject to discretion
along with damages, if             of the Court.
any.
9.     Pronouncement Within 30-60 days from             As and when the Court
Order 20 R 1  conclusion of arguments.           can devote time to
pronounce.
10.    Appeal Process   Provided       separately       As guided by
the CPC
through the Act and the         in terms of Order 41.
manner. Disposal in six         No      timeline     for
months is provided.             adjudication is present.
A Court with a full
docket might take
years to decide, unless
by reason of routine
transfer, the matter is
re-heard by a new
Judge/Justice.
(ii)      Thus, litigants in civil suits being 'commercial disputes' but not
of 'specified value', are not governed by the CCA, and would
not be able to take the benefit of the unique procedures
provided in the CCA. This of course, in effect, has a negative
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                      Page 20 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
impact on the speedy adjudication of IPR disputes themselves.
Sukumar, ld. Amicus, the purpose behind the 2018 Amendment
is borne out as under:
"2. The global economic environment has since
become increasingly competitive and to attract
business at international level, India needs to
further improve its ranking in the World Bank
'Doing Business Report' which, inter alia,
considers the dispute resolution environment in
the country as one of the parameters for doing
business. Further, the tremendous economic
development has ushered in enormous
commercial activities in the country including
foreign direct investments, public private
partnership, etc., which has prompted initiating
legislative measures for speedy settlement of
commercial disputes, widen the scope of the
courts to deal with commercial disputes and
facilitate ease of doing business. Needless to say
that early resolution of commercial disputes of
even lesser value creates a positive image
amongst the investors about the strong and
responsive Indian legal system. It is, therefore,
proposed to amend the
Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts Act, 2015
xxx        xxx         xxx
4. It is proposed to introduce the Commercial
Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts (Amendment)
Bill, 2018 to replace the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts (Amendment) Ordinance,
2018, which inter alia, provides for the following
namely:--
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 21 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(i) to reduce the specified value of commercial
disputes from the existing one crore rupees to
three lakh rupees, and to enable the parties to
approach the lowest level of subordinate courts
for speedy resolution of commercial disputes;"
36.    The scheme of the CCA including the jurisdictional aspects of the
Commercial Courts and the Commercial Divisions of the High Courts was
considered by the Supreme Court in
Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.
(supra). The Supreme Court in
the said judgment
observed as under:
"25. As noted above, clause (i) of
Section 2
the Act defines "Specified Value", in relation to
a commercial dispute, shall mean the value of
the subject matter in respect of a suit as
determined in accordance with
section 12
[which shall not be less than three lakh rupees]
or such higher value, as may be notified by the
Central Government".
Section 12
provides for
criteria for valuation of the suit, application or
appeal for the purpose of the Act.
26. A matter will fall under the jurisdiction of the
Commercial Court or the Commercial Division
of the High Court on the following factors:-
(i) it shall be a commercial dispute within the
meaning of Section 2(1)(c) of the Act; and
(ii) such commercial disputes are of a specified
value as per
Section 2(i)
of the Act."
37.    The proposition that Commercial Courts would get jurisdiction in IPR
matters only if the twin conditions are satisfied is also reiterated in Super
Cassettes (supra), where the ld. Single Judge was concerned with the
question as to whether the Commercial Division of the High Court would
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 22 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
have jurisdiction even if the 'specified value' of the suit is below Rs.2
crores. However, the said judgment was prior to the 2018 Amendment.
(iv)   Role of 'Valuation' in Satisfaction of the Twin Test
38.    The fact that the twin test requirement is to be satisfied is also held in
judgments of various High Courts. This has led to the question as to how
such 'specified value' is to be examined and whether valuation of a suit has
any role in the same. Some relevant decisions on this issue are considered
hereinbelow.
39.    In Soni Dave (supra), the ld. Single Judge of this Court has held that
the CCA does not interfere with the provisions of the
Court Fees Act
or the
Suits Valuation Act
. The observations of the Court are as under:
"25.
The Commercial Courts Act
has not been enacted
to interfere with the
Courts Fees Act
or the
Suits
Valuation Act
. It is a settled principle of law that the
provisions such as
Section 21
supra have to be read
and interpreted by finding out the extent to which the
legislature intended to give it a overriding effect and
the context in which such a provision is made and on a
consideration of purpose and policy underlying the
enactment. It is also relevant to consider whether the
conflicting enactment can be described as a special
one and in which case the special one may prevail over
the more general one, notwithstanding that the general
one is later in time.
xxx            xxx            xxx
25. In my view
Section 12
of the Commercial Courts
Act providing for determination of specified value as
defined in
Section 2(i)
thereof is not intended to
provide for a new mode of determining the valuation of
the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction and court fees. It
would be incongruous to hold that while for the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 23 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
purpose of payment of court fees the deemed fiction
provided in the
Court Fees Act
for determining the
value of the property is to apply but not for
determining the specified value under the
Commercial
Courts Act
26. In my opinion
Section 12
of the Commercial Courts
Act has to be read harmoniously with the
Court Fees
Act and the Suits Valuation Act
and reading so, the
specified value of a suit where the relief sought relates
to immovable property or to a right thereunder has to
be according to the market value of the immovable
property only in such suits where the suit as per the
Court Fees Act
and / or the
Suits Valuation Act
has to
be valued on the market value of the property and not
where as per the
Court Fees Act and the Suits
Valuation Act
the valuation of a suit even if for the
relief of recovery of immovable property or a right
therein is required to be anything other than market
value as is the case in a suit by a landlord for recovery
of possession of immovable property from a tenant."
40.      Notably, in Soni Dave (supra), the Court was concerned with a case
relating to an immovable property not used exclusively in trade or
commerce, and immovable property does have specific Court fee assigned to
it in the
Court Fees Act
41.      The Kerala High Court also followed the decision of Soni Dave
(supra) in
C.K. Surendran v. Kunhimoosa [CRP
146/2021, decided on 17th
September, 2021] in a suit concerning immovable property and held as
under:
"12. I also find merit in the contention that the
provisions of the
Commercial Courts Act and the Court
Fees Act
should be interpreted harmoniously.
Section
of the Court Fees Act deals with suits for injunction.
As per Section 27(c), where the subject matter of the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 24 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
suit has a market value or not, fee shall be computed
on the amount at which the relief sought is valued in
the plaint or on Rs.500/- whichever is higher. The
relief in the instant suit is for a decree of mandatory
injunction directing the defendant to quit from the
building described in plaint A and B schedules with
damages for loss of user and occupation at the rate of
Rs.10,42,125.00 per month from the date of suit till
delivery of possession and the petitioner has paid court
fees under Section 27(c). In a suit for injunction
simplicitor, it is the value of the relief claimed and not
the value of the property involved that determines the
jurisdiction. "Subject matter" is the substance for
adjudication and has reference to the right which the
plaintiff seeks to enforce and the valuation of the suit
depends upon the value of the subject matter. Similar
question was considered by the High Court of Delhi
in Mrs.Soni Dave (supra). After careful scrutiny of
Section 12
of the Act and the relevant provision of the
Court Fees Act
, it was held as follows;
"27. In my view
Section 12
of the
Commercial Courts Act providing for
determination of specified value as defined in
Section 2(i)
thereof is not intended to provide
for a new mode zof determining the valuation
of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction and
court fees. It would be incongruous to hold
that while for the purpose of payment of
court fees the deemed fiction provided in the
Court Fees Act
for determining the value of
the property is to apply but not for
determining the specified value under the
Commercial Courts Act
28. In my opinion
Section 12
of the
Commercial Courts Act has to be read
harmoniously with the
Court Fees Act and
the Suits Valuation Act
and reading so, the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 25 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
specified value of a suit where the relief
sought relates to immovable property or to a
right thereunder has to be according to the
market value of the immovable property only
in such suits where the suit as per the
Court
Fees Act
and/or the
Suits Valuation Act
has
to be valued on the market value of the
property and not where as per the
Court
Fees Act and the Suits Valuation Act
the
valuation of a suit even if for the relief of
recovery of immovable property or a right
therein is required to be anything other than
market value as is the case in a suit by a
landlord for recovery of possession of
immovable property from a tenant."
Same view was taken by the Karnataka High Court in
Fine Footwear Pvt. Ltd. Represented by its Director v.
Skechers USA Inc. and Another [2019 SCC Online
Kar. 1024]. I am in respectful agreement with the
above judgments. No doubt, the specified value of a
suit is liable to be computed in accordance with the
market value of the immovable property in such suits
where, even as per the
Court Fees Act
, the value is to
be determined on the basis of the market value of the
property. In respect of suits where the valuation under
the
Court Fees Act
is based on anything other than
market value of the immovable property, the valuation
under the
Court Fees Act
should be the basis for
deciding the pecuniary jurisdiction."
42.    Thus, in Soni Dave (supra) and
C.K. Surendran
(supra), the Delhi
High Court and Kerala High Court held that the valuation of the suit for the
purposes of Court fee cannot be different from the 'specified value' as
contemplated under Section 12 of the CCA.
However, the Karnataka High
Court in
Kirloskar
(supra) - a case concerning IPR - held as under:
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 26 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
"8. The twin requirements of this Act are that a dispute
has to be a commercial dispute, and secondly, it must
be of certain pecuniary limit, namely Rs.3,00,000/- or
above. The term commercial dispute has been defined
Section 2(c)
of the Act.
Section 2(1)(c)(xvii)
clearly
deals with the intellectual property rights relating to
registered, and unregistered trademarks. Undoubtedly,
the present case deals with a trademark the usage of
trademark by the appellant, which according to the
respondent plaintiff is an illegal usage. Thus, the
subject matter of the dispute does relate to intellectual
property rights. Hence, the dispute is a commercial
dispute as defined by
Section 2(1)(c)(xvii)
of the Act. 9.
The Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act
deals with the calculation of Court Fees. Section 26 of
the said Act clearly states that in a suit for injunction,
whether the subject- matter of the suit has a market
value, or not, the fee shall be computed on the amount
at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint, or on
rupees one thousand whichever is higher. Therefore, a
distinction has to be made between the value of the
subject-matter, and the calculation of Court fees.
According to Section 26(c), the Court fee shall be
based on the relief sought, and the value of the relief
mentioned in the plaint. Admittedly, in the present
case, in the plaint, the relief sought was valued as
Rs.3,000/-. But nonetheless, the value of the subject-
matter, that is the infringement of the trademark, has
not been stated. But considering the fact that the
dispute relates to the infringement of trademark that
too by a company, the value of the subject matter can
safely be taken to be more than Rs.3,00,000/-."
43.    Thus, insofar as IPR suits are concerned, the Karnataka High Court
has taken a view that the Court fee shall be payable on the basis of the relief
sought in the plaint, however, the value of the subject matter i.e., the
infringement of trademark in a trademark case could be much higher. Thus,
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 27 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
the value of the suit for the purpose of Court fee and the 'specified value' of
the suit for exercising jurisdiction in an IPR matter could be different, in the
opinion of the Karnataka High Court.
44.
Fine Footwear Pvt Ltd v. Skechers USA Inc & Ors.
, (2019) 5
Kant LJ 358, the Karnataka High Court also interpreted the provisions of
the CCA along with the Court Fee Act and the Suits Valuation Act and
observed as under:
"8...The High Court of Delhi in the case of Mrs. Soni
Dhawe vs m/s. Trans asian Industries Expositions Pvt.
Ltd., AIR 2016 Delhi 186 at has observed as under:
"The Commercial Courts has not been
enacted to interfere with the
Court Fees Act
Suits Valuation Act
...
Section 12
of the
Commercial Courts Act providing for
determination of specified value as defined in
Section 2(1)(i)
thereof is not intended to
provide for a new mode of determining the
valuation of the suit for the purpose of
jurisdiction and court fees. It would be
incongruous to hold that while for the
purpose of payment of court fees the deemed
fiction provided in the
Court Fees Act
for
determining the value of property is to apply
but not for determining the specified value
under the
Commercial Courts Act
...
Section
of the Commercial Courts Act has to be
read harmoniously with the
Court Fees Act
and Suits Valuation Act
..."
9. It has been a well settled position of law that the
plaintiff being the dominus litis has the prerogative of
choosing the Court and determine the valuation of the
suit for the purpose of pecuniary jurisdiction, special
jurisdiction or for computation of court fees; the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                             Page 28 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
opposing party cannot insist that the suit be tried
before some other Court without establishing the lack
of jurisdiction of the Court in which the cause is
brought; the suit involves a commercial dispute, is
true; but, there is no material placed on record to
prima facie show that its specified value is Rupees
Three Lakh or above, in terms of
Section 2(1)(i)
r/w
Section 12 of the 2015 Act. A Coordinate Bench of this
Court in RFA No. 1/2015 in the case of Kirloskar Aaf
Limited v. M/s. American Air Filters Company Inc and
Another vide judgment dated 25.09.2018 at paragraph
No.8 observed "the twin requirements of this Act are
that a dispute has to be a Commercial Dispute and
secondly it must be of a certain pecuniary limit, namely
Rupees Three Lakh or above ..." In other words, the
Commercial Courts have jurisdiction only in such
matters which pass the Twin Test i.e., existence of a
"Commercial Dispute" as defined under
Section
2(1)(c)(xvii)
and the "Specified Value" as defined
under
Section 2(c)(i)
r/w Section 12 of the 2015 Act. In
the present writ petition, although the suit involves a
Commercial Dispute, the subject matter of the suit is
apparently less than the Specified Value. To put it
succinctly, the commercial courts shall have exclusive
jurisdiction if both the commercial dispute and
specified value concur to exist and not just one of them,
as rightly contended by learned Sr. Counsel for the
respondent."
45.      The Bombay High Court on the other hand in
Bharat Bhogilal Patel
v. Leitz Tooling Systems India Pvt Ltd
, 2020(82) PTC 458 (Bom) held as
under:
"27. In my view, literally interpreting Section 16, the
interpretation that follows is that the amendments
introduced by Section 16 apply only to Commercial
Disputes of a Specified Value and not Commercial
Disputes not of a Specified Value. This is the letter of
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 29 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
law. Section 16, as it reads currently ought to be
interpreted literally.
Kanai Lal Sur vs. Paramnidhi
Sadhukhan
, it was held by the Apex Court that if the
words used are capable of one construction only then it
would not be open to the courts to adopt any other
hypothetical construction on the ground that such
construction is more consistent with the alleged object
and policy of the subject Act.
Further, the Apex Court,
in its decision rendered in
Commr. of Customs v. Dilip
Kumar & Co.,34
has held thus:
"21.The well-settled principle is that when the words in
a statute are clear, plain and unambiguous and only
one meaning can be inferred, the courts are bound to
give effect to the said meaning irrespective of
consequences. If the words in the statute are plain and
unambiguous, it becomes necessary 33 AIR 1957 SC
907 34 (2018) 9 SCC 1 Nitin 56 / 57 RPL-15-2019-
3.doc to expound those words in their natural and
ordinary sense. The words used declare the intention of
the legislature."
28. Additionally, as submitted by Mr. Kohli, there may
be certain inefficient consequences resulting from the
literal interpretation of Section 16. Illustratively, the
present Suit is titled a 'Commercial Suit' and yet, would
be governed by the un- amended
CPC
. However, in my
view, should the legislature deem fit, it may carry out
an amendment to overcome these consequences and/or
may provide a clarification if it so deems fit. Till such
time, I am currently bound by the language of Section
16 and am inclined to interpret the said section
literally."
46.    Thus, the opinions of various High Courts, on the question of
valuation in 'commercial disputes' are varied.
(v)    Minutes of the Meeting of the State Court Management Systems
Committee
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                             Page 30 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
47.    In this backdrop of 'specified value' and its relation to valuation, it
would also be relevant to consider the decision taken on the administrative
side, by the State Courts Management System Committee of this Court, in
its meeting on 4th February, 2020. The question had arisen in the context of a
communication received from the ld. District & Sessions Judge, Mr. Dinesh
Kumar (as he then was), relating to the jurisdiction of Commercial Courts.
In the said letter, the concerned ld. District Judge had brought to the notice
of the Committee, the confusion that had arisen in respect of transferring of
IPR cases to Commercial Courts. The Committee, consisting of then
Hon'ble Mr. Justice R.S. Endlaw and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Yogesh Khanna,
considered the said communication and, in its minutes dated 4th February,
2020, directed as under:
"Considered and discussed.
Section 134
of the
Trademarks Act, 1999 states that no suit for the
infringement or relating to any right in a registered
trademark or for passing of regarding any trademark
"shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District
Court having jurisdiction to try the suit." The words
"inferior to a District Court" have been interpreted
and held to mean the court of a District Judge and not
the Court of the Senior Civil Judge or the Civil Judge.
Therefore, matters pertaining to trademark in which
the relief even if valued less than Rs.3,00,000/- can be
entertained only by the courts of District
Judge/Additional District Judge at the District Court
level.
The question whether a suit within the meaning of
Section 134
of the Trademarks Act, 1999 can at all be
permitted to be valued at less than Rs.3,00,000/-which
court fees paid on valuation below Rs.3,00,000/-is
maintainable or not may be left to be decided on the
judicial side by the court of the District Judge
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 31 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(Commercial Court) to whom such matter has been
transferred upon constitution of dedicated courts of
District Judge (Commercial Court).
As regards the previous notification of this Court
nominating all courts of District Judge/Additional
District Judge as Commercial Courts, in view of
establishment of dedicated courts of District Judge
(Commercial Court), the Committee recommends that
the order No. 58/DHC/Gaz/G-1/VI.E2(a)/2018 dated
7.7.2018 vide which all the District Judge/Additional
District judges were designated as Commercial Courts
be withdrawn with immediate effect."
48.    A perusal of the above Minutes shows that the decision of the
SCMSC was that the question as to whether a trademark suit can be valued
below Rs.3 lakhs, ought to be left to be decided on the judicial side by the
District Judge (Commercial).
49.    However, this Court notices that this decision may not have been
uniformly implemented in District Courts. Thus, even as on date, there are
several IPR suits, which are being instituted and adjudicated by District
Judges (non-Commercial). In this view of the matter, this Court is of the
opinion that the examination of 'specified value' and valuation, is
imperative to determine the relevant forum.
(vi)   Determination of Jurisdiction in an IPR Dispute
A.     Applicable Laws
50.    Keeping the above principles in mind, the following would be the list
of statutes that could be applicable for considering the issue at hand:
(i)
Trade Marks Act, 1999
(ii)
(iii)
Indian Patents Act, 1970
(iv)
Indian Designs Act, 2000
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                             Page 32 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(v)
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers Rights Act, 2001
(vi)      Civil Procedure Code, 1908;
(vii)
Commercial Courts Act, 2015
(viii)
Court Fees Act, 1870
; and
(ix)
Suits Valuation Act, 1887
B.     Definition of 'Specified Value'
51.    It is clear from the above that the term 'specified value' under the
CCA would be a factor in determining the Court's jurisdiction. This begs an
examination of the term 'specified value', at the first instance. The term
'specified value' is defined in
Section 2(i)
of the CCA as under:
"(i) Specified Value, in relation to a commercial
dispute, shall mean the value of the subject-matter in
respect of a suit as determined in accordance with
section 12 [which shall not be less than three lakh
rupees] or such higher value, as may be notified by the
Central Government."
52.    The determination of 'specified value' is to be as per Section 12 of the
CCA, which reads as under:
"12. Determination of Specified Value. --(1) The
Specified Value of the subject-matter of the commercial
dispute in a suit, appeal or application shall be
determined in the following manner:--
(a) where the relief sought in a suit or
application is for recovery of money, the
money sought to be recovered in the suit or
application inclusive of interest, if any,
computed up to the date of filing of the suit
or application, as the case may be, shall be
taken into account for determining such
Specified Value;
(b) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or
application relates to movable property or
to a right therein, the market value of the
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 33 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
movable property as on the date of filing of
the suit, appeal or application, as the case
may be, shall be taken into account for
determining such Specified Value;
(c) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or
application relates to immovable property
or to a right therein, the market value of the
immovable property, as on the date of filing
of the suit, appeal or application, as the
case may be, shall be taken into account for
determining Specified Value; [and]
(d) where the relief sought in a suit, appeal or
application relates to any other intangible
right, the market value of the said rights as
estimated by the plaintiff shall be taken into
account for determining Specified Value;"
C.     Valuation under Other Statutes
53.    In so far as the other factors determining jurisdiction are concerned,
the valuation of the suit for
Suits Valuation Act and Court Fees Act
becomes
relevant. As per
Section 8
of the Suits Valuation Act, the Court fee value
and jurisdictional value would be the same in certain suits, as the plaintiff
files a suit on the basis of relief being sought and pays the Court fee on the
said basis. In the case of intangibles such as intellectual property, the
manner in which the suit is to be valued is not specified in the
Court Fees
Act
. The same is also not specified in
Section 9
of the Suits Valuation Act or
the Punjab & Haryana High Court Rules framed thereunder. The
computation under
Section 7
of the Court Fees Act for various categories of
suits, is as below:
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 34 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
Cla         Case Type                   Court Fee Determination
use
No.
(i)     For money               According to the amount claimed
(ii)    For maintenance and According to the value of the subject-matter
annuities           of the suit, and such value shall be deemed
to be ten times the amount claimed to be
payable for one year
(iii)   For other movable According to such value at the date of
property other than presenting the plaint
money,    having  a
market-value
(iv)    In suits for:            Plaintiff shall state the amount at which he
• movable property values the relief sought
of no market-value
• to enforce a right to
family property
• declaratory decree
and consequential
relief
• an injunction
• easements
• accounts
(v)     For possession of land, Multiplier of revenue payable or net profits
houses and gardens
(vi)    To enforce a right of According to the value (computed in
pre-emption           accordance with paragraph (v) of this
section) of the land, house or garden in
respect of which the right is claimed
(vii) For interest of assignee Fifteen times his net profits as such for the
of land revenue          year next before the date of presenting the
plaint
(viii) To set aside         an According to the amount for which the land
attachment              or interest was attached
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 35 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
(ix)   To redeem                  According to the principal money expressed
To foreclose               to be secured by the instrument of mortgage
(x)    For               specific According      to    the     amount                   of
performance                consideration/amount agreed, etc.
(xi)   Between landlord and According to the amount of the rent of
tenant               the immovable property to which the suit
refers, payable for the year next before the
date of presenting the plaint
54.    As there are no specific factors prescribed for calculating Court
fee/valuation in cases of injunctive/declaratory reliefs or intellectual
property matters and it is left to the plaintiff to value the same, it is pertinent
to refer to judicial precedents, to ascertain the extent of the plaintiff's
discretion. The legal position as to suit valuation, choice of forum, payment
of Court fee, etc., both before and after the enactment of the CCA, as
emerging from various judicial decisions, is summarized below:
(i)       To decide the valuation and Court fee payable in a case, the
Court should look into the allegations in the plaint and examine the
substantive reliefs. Mere astuteness in drafting the plaint will not be
allowed to stand in the way of the Court to look into the substance of
the relief sought. Whimsical valuation is thus not permitted.
Shamsher Singh v. Rajinder Prashad & Ors.
, (1973) 2 SCC 524].
(ii)      Valuation of a suit has to be adequate and reasonable. The
plaintiff cannot deliberately/arbitrarily undervalue the relief. There
must be a genuine effort by the plaintiff to estimate the relief.
Meenakshisundaram Chettiar v. Venkatachalam Chettiar
, (1980) 1
SCC 616];
(iii)     If the valuation given by the plaintiff is arbitrary and
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 36 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
unreasonable, the Court may reject the same and permit the plaintiff
to correct the valuation or have the plaint rejected. The valuation must
not be arbitrary or manifestly inadequate. [
Abdul Hamid Shamsi v.
Abdul Majid
, (1988) 2 SCC 575]
(iv)      The plaintiff cannot whimsically choose a ridiculous figure for
filing the suit in an arbitrary manner where there are positive
materials or objective standards of valuation of the relief, on the face
of the plaint. [Commercial Aviation & Travel Company v. Vimani
Pannalal, (1988) SCC 423]
(v)       The plaintiff has to give definite reasons for not ascertaining the
exact value of the relief. If the exact valuation is not done, on the
basis of certain basic requirements, the plaintiff's discretion would
become arbitrary. Lack of bonafides would also cloud the right of the
plaintiff to value the suit as per its own will. The Court can then
compel the plaintiff to examine the plaint and would require the
plaintiff to pay the requisite ad valorem Court fee. [
Bharat Sanchar
Nigam Ltd. v. All India Bharat Sanchar Nigam Executives'
Association (Regd.) & Ors.
(2006) 130 DLT 195]
(vi)      The plaintiff being the dominus litis, can choose its forum.
However, this prerogative or convenience for the plaintiff cannot
eclipse the requirement of justice. The right to choose the forum is not
an absolute one and can be taken away. [
Subhashini Malik v. S.K.
Gandhi & Ors.
(2016) 233 DLT 83]
(vii) A court of a higher grade does not lack inherent jurisdiction to
adjudicate a dispute which could have been entertained by a lower
court, whereas the same would not hold good in the reverse situation.
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                 Page 37 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
[Kesavarapu Venkateswarlu & Ors. v Sardharala Satanaryana &
Ors., AIR 1957 AP 49(FB) and V Ramamirthaam v. Rama Film
Service, AIR 1951 Mad 93(FB)]
(viii) There are three categories of jurisdiction: (i)Territorial
jurisdiction; (ii)Pecuniary jurisdiction; and (iii)Subject matter
jurisdiction. It is only if the Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction,
that it would lack inherent jurisdiction. [
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi
v. D.L.F. Universal Ltd. And Ors.
, (
2005) 7 SCC 791 and Mantoo
Sarkar v Oriental Insurance Company Limited & Ors.
, (2009) 2
SCC 244]
(ix)    The intention of the underlying statutes has to be considered
and given effect to, unless it leads to an absurdity. The construction of
a statute ought to be such as to advance the intention of the legislation
and remedy any mischief. [
Glaxo Laboratories v. Presiding Officer
AIR 1984 SC 505]
(x) When there are multiple suits which could govern any subject matter,
the endeavour of the Court ought to be to apply a harmonious
construction to the said provisions, especially when there is no
repugnancy or inconsistency. [
Maya Mathew v. State of Kerala and
Ors.
, (2010) 4 SCC 498 and Lalit Babbar (supra)]
D.       Consequences of Absolute Discretion: Undervaluation and Forum
Shopping
55.      As per the table of Court fees discussed in paragraph 53 above, it is
noteworthy that insofar as a decree of declaration and consequential relief or
injunction is concerned, the factors to be considered are not provided in the
Court Fees Act
. As per the legal position captured above, it is the Court's
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 38 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
duty to ensure that a reasonable estimate is provided by the plaintiff and
there is no undervaluation. Such an estimate could be arrived at on the basis
of the requirements stipulated in the statutory provisions.
56.    This is especially important for IPR suits because usually in IPR suits,
the plaintiff seeks a decree of interim/permanent injunction or a decree of
declaration, coupled with damages/rendition of accounts. Whenever reliefs
are sought of damages or rendition of accounts, the suit is valued on a
monetary basis by the plaintiff using a rough estimate and Court fee is paid
on the said basis. It is very unlikely that the valuation in suits where one of
the reliefs sought is for damages and/or rendition of accounts, is less than
Rs.3 lakhs. However, even in some cases where damages or rendition of
accounts is sought, the ingenuity of lawyers and litigants does lead to suits
being valued at less than Rs.3 lakhs. In such cases, the relief of injunction is
also valued at Rs.200/- or any other amount less than Rs.3 lakhs and
minimal Court fee is paid, despite the intellectual property - which is the
subject matter of the suit - being of a very high value.
57.    For instance, in the present appeal which is before this Court, the
mark being sought to be protected is 'VPL INDIA' against the Defendant's
mark 'BPI'. The turnover of the Plaintiff as pleaded in the suit and as per the
CA Certificate placed on record dated 5th August, 2021, is approximately
Rs.67306 lakhs over the last three financial years, i.e., 2018-2021.
Moreover, the Plaintiff has stated in its plaint that it has "commanded
handsome sales running into Billions of Rupees". It is also stated to have
spent "enormous amounts of money" in advertising and publicity. The said
mark, including the label, is stated to have extensive goodwill and
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                                Page 39 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
registrations dating back to 2006. The Plaintiff has stated that it has reputed
clients such as Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, NTPC, BSNL, MTNL, L&T, etc.,
across India and worldwide. The Plaintiff is also stated to have extensive
reach and online presence through both its website and third-party sites like
IndiaMART, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc. The Plaintiff also has numerous
quality certifications and recognitions, including ISO, BIS, and One Star
Export House (recognized by the Director General of Foreign Trade).
Despite all these facts, it is puzzling that the reliefs of injunction as also
delivery-up, are valued at Rs. 200/- each for Court fee and jurisdiction,
which is much below Rs.3 lakhs. The Court fee paid is Rs.100/- for such
reliefs. Additionally, the relief of rendition of accounts is valued at Rs.
1000/- and Court fees of Rs. 150/- is paid for the same. Such a course of
action appears to be quite unusual and quixotic, as there is no basis in the
suit as to why a trademark suit of a brand having such a huge turnover is
sought to be valued at such a low threshold. Moreover, the suit in the present
case does not mention the 'specified value' at all, but merely the value of
reliefs sought.
58.    In the opinion of this Court, by merely valuing the relief in the suit
below Rs.3 lakhs, the plaintiff ought not to be permitted to escape the rigors
of the CCA or indulge in forum shopping or bench hunting. The practice of
forum shopping has been time and again condemned by Courts and most
recently in Vijay Kumar Ghai & Ors. v. State of West Bengal & Ors. [SLP
(Crl.) 10951 of 2019, decided on 22nd March, 2022], the Supreme Court
held as under:
"7. Predominantly, the Indian Judiciary has time and
again reiterated that forum shopping take several hues
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                            Page 40 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
and shades but the concept of 'forum shopping' has not
been rendered an exclusive definition in any Indian
statute. Forum shopping as per Merriam Webster
dictionary is:
The practice of choosing the court in which to bring an
action from among those courts that could properly
exercise jurisdiction based on determination of which
court is likely to provide the most favourable outcome.
8 . The Indian judiciary's observation and obiter dicta
has aided in streamlining the concept of forum
shopping in the Indian legal system. This Court has
condemned the practice of forum shopping by litigants
and termed it as an abuse of law and also deciphered
different categories of forum shopping.
xxx       xxx          xxx
10. Forum shopping has been termed as disreputable
practice by the courts and has no sanction and
paramountcy in law. In spite of this Court condemning
the practice of forum shopping, Respondent No. 2 filed
two complaints i.e., a complaint Under
Section 156(3)
Code of Criminal Procedure before the Tis Hazari
Court, New Delhi o 06.06.2012 and a complaint which
was eventually registered as FIR No. 168 Under
Section 406
120B
Indian Penal Code before PS
Bowbazar, Calcutta o 28.03.2013. i.e., one in Delhi
and one complaint in Kolkata. The Complaint filed in
Kolkata was a reproduction of the complaint filed in
Delhi except with the change of place occurrence in
order to create a jurisdiction.
11. A two-Judge bench of this Court in
Krishna Lal
Chawla and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Anr
MANU/SC/0161/2021 : (2021) 5 SCC 435 observed
that multiple complaints by the same party against the
same Accused in respect of the same incident is
impermissible. It held that Permitting multiple
complaints by the same party in respect of the same
incident, whether it involves a cognizable or private
complaint offence, will lead to the Accused being
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                           Page 41 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
entangled in numerous criminal proceedings. As such
he would be forced to keep surrendering his liberty and
precious time before the police and the courts, as and
when required in each case."
59.    It is thus clear to this Court that while all IPR disputes irrespective of
their 'specified value' may not invoke the provisions of the CCA, there
ought to be a preliminary exercise required to confirm that the valuation of
such suits has not been done arbitrarily. This may be done on the judicial
side, as per the SCMSC. Such examination by the Commercial Court is
essential so as to obviate any attempts of forum shopping.
E.     The Way Forward
60.    In the backdrop of the above discussed legal position and the statutory
provisions, insofar as Delhi is concerned, the following facts are of utmost
relevance:
(i)       The pecuniary jurisdiction of the Commercial Division of the
High Court is Rs.2 crores and above.
(ii)      The pecuniary jurisdiction of the District Courts (District
Judges/ ADJs), is between Rs.3 lakhs to Rs.2 crores.
(iii)     Consequently, suits which are valued below Rs.3 lakhs are filed
before lower Courts i.e., Sub-Judge/Civil Judge
(iv)      In Delhi, Commercial Courts have been notified vide Order
No.60, only at the level of the District Courts, as the pecuniary
jurisdiction of these Courts also matches with the lowest threshold
fixed by the CCA for 'specified value', i.e., Rs.3 lakhs.
(v)       As per the IPR Statutes, IPR suits have to be mandatorily filed
only in "District Courts having jurisdiction".
61.    The facts being so, there are two pertinent questions before this Court:
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 42 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
"(i) Can IPR suits be valued below Rs.3 lakhs and be listed
before the District Judges who are not notified as Commercial
Courts?; and
(ii) Whether the provisions of CCA would be applicable to such
disputes?"
62.    To answer the above, first, the discussion in paragraph 25 above is
pertinent, as it clearly shows that IPR disputes are a set of disputes which lie
only before the District Court. Thus, in that sense, such disputes are an
exception to the rule of institution of cases at the Court of the lowest level
having jurisdiction. With the enactment of the CCA, the subject-matter
jurisdiction over IPR disputes now vests with the Commercial Courts, at the
District Court Level. Therefore, can litigants and lawyers escape the rigors
of the provisions of the CCA by valuing the suits below Rs.3 lakhs? The
answer ought to be a clear 'NO'. This is due to the following reasons:
(i)       The application of the judicial principles that the plaintiff is
dominus litis and is free to value the suit in the manner it so chooses,
has to be in the context of enactment of the CCA. The principles
cannot be stretched to justify undervaluation of IPR disputes and
payment of lower Court fee.
(ii)      Not ascribing a 'specified value' in the suit would be contrary
to the scheme of the CCA which requires every suit to have a
'specified value', if the subject matter of the suit is a 'commercial
dispute'. A perusal of Section 12(1)(d) of the CCA does offer some
guidance, that the 'specified value' in case of intangible rights would
be the market value of the said rights as estimated by the plaintiff.
(iii)     In IPR disputes, the relief of injunction or damages may be
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 43 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
valued by the plaintiff, at an amount lower than the sum of Rs.3 lakhs
and Court fee may be paid on that basis. If such valuation is
permitted, despite some objective criteria being available for valuing
IPR - in the CCA - it would defeat the very purpose of the enactment
of special provisions for IPR statutes and the CCA. These statutes
would have to be harmoniously construed i.e., in a manner so as to
further the purpose of the legislation and not to defeat it. Thus, it
would be mandatory for IPR suits to be ascribed a 'specified value',
in the absence of which the valuation of the suit below Rs.3 lakhs
would be arbitrary, whimsical and wholly unreasonable. In this view,
intellectual property rights being intangible rights, some value would
have to be given to the subject matter of the dispute as well. The
Court would have to take into consideration the 'specified value'
based upon not merely the value of the relief sought but also the
market value of the intangible right involved in the said dispute.
(iv)      The subject matter of IPR disputes is usually trademarks, rights
property. The said amount of Rs.3 lakhs is the estimation of the
legislature as being the lowest threshold in any 'commercial dispute'
in India which deserves to benefit from speedier adjudication, owing
to the economic progress in the country. The intention of the
Legislature in keeping a lower threshold in a 'commercial dispute' of
Rs.3 lakhs cannot be rendered meaningless. It would only be in
exceptional cases that valuation of IPR disputes below Rs.3 lakhs
could be justified. Accordingly, Section 12(1)(d) has been included in
the CCA, where the subject matter of "intellectual property" has been
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 44 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
contemplated by the Legislature to be an intangible right, in respect of
which the market value has to be estimated by the plaintiff, for
determining the 'specified value'.
(v)       The average Court fee paid in Delhi in any civil suit is
approximately 3% to 1% of the pecuniary value ascribed to the suit.
In fact, Delhi is one of the territories where ad valorem Court fee is
paid beyond a particular threshold. When seen from this perspective,
i.e., that at Rs.3 lakhs, the Court fee payable is minimal, it is apparent
that the only reason for which IPR disputes may be valued below Rs.3
lakhs by litigants or lawyers would be to indulge in forum shopping
and bench hunting and not merely to exercise the option of the forum
where relief is sought. The purpose would also be to escape the rigors
of the provisions of the CCA. Such a practice would constitute abuse
by plaintiffs of their rights, at the very least.
(vi)      Usually, IPR disputes are filed by business entities. However,
considering the Court fee payable even if such suits are valued at a
minimum of Rs.3,00,000/-, even individual IPR owners would be
easily able to afford the Court fee at the rate of 1-3%. There thus
appears to be no valid or justifiable cause to value an IPR suit below
Rs.3 lakhs except for oblique motives. Thus, the discretion vested in
the plaintiff to value the suit as it pleases, ought not to be extended or
stretched to an extent that it encourages malpractice, misuse, abuse
and forum shopping.
63.    In view of the above analysis and legal position, since IPR suits
have to be instituted in the District Courts "having jurisdiction", for the
territory of Delhi, it is held that the District Judges notified as
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 45 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
Commercial Courts which have subject matter jurisdiction under the
CCA, would be the District Courts "having jurisdiction".
64.    Therefore, in Delhi, in order to avail of its remedies provided under
the various IPR statutes, a plaintiff ought to usually institute the suit before
the District Court having jurisdiction i.e., District Judge (Commercial) by
valuing it at Rs. 3 lakhs or above, and pay the basic required Court fee to
invoke the jurisdiction of the said Court. However, acknowledging the
plaintiff's reasonable discretion in valuing its suit, it is held that in case a
plaintiff values an IPR suit below the threshold of Rs.3 lakhs, such suits
would be listed before the District Judge (Commercial) first, in order to
determine as to whether the valuation is arbitrarily whimsical or deliberately
undervalued.
65.    This Court is cognizant of the fact that the valuation of intellectual
property is by itself a very complex process. It is clarified that the
Commercial Court is not expected to value the specific IP on the basis of
any mathematical formulae but to broadly take into consideration whether
the said IP would be worth more than Rs. 3 lakhs, which is the threshold for
the Commercial Court to exercise jurisdiction.
66.    In light of the above discussion, the following directions are issued:
(i)       Usually, in all IPR cases, the valuation ought to be Rs.3 lakhs
and above and proper Court fee would have to be paid accordingly.
All IPR suits to be instituted before District Courts, would therefore,
first be instituted before the District Judge (Commercial).
(ii)      In case of any IPR suits valued below Rs. 3 lakhs, the
Commercial Court shall examine the specified value and suit
valuation to ensure it is not arbitrary or unreasonable and the suit is
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                              Page 46 of 47
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed By:Devanshu
Signing Date:04.06.2022
22:50:13
not undervalued.
(iii)     Upon such examination, the concerned Commercial Court
would pass appropriate orders in accordance with law either directing
the plaintiff to amend the plaint and pay the requisite Court fee or to
proceed with the suit as a non-commercial suit.
(iv)      In order to however maintain consistency and clarity in
adjudication, even such suits which may be valued below Rs.3 lakhs
and continue as non-commercial suits, shall also continue to be listed
before the District Judge (Commercial), but may not be subjected to
the provisions of the CCA.
(v)       All pending IPR suits before the different District Judges (non-
Commercial) in Delhi shall be placed before the concerned District
Judges (Commercial) for following the procedure specified above.
plaintiffs who wish to amend the Plaint would be permitted to do so in
accordance with law.
sent to all District Courts for necessary action.
official website of the Delhi High Court, www.delhihighcourt.nic.in, shall
authority/entity or litigant.
PRATHIBA M. SINGH
JUDGE
JUNE 3, 2022
dj/dk/ms
FAO-IPD 1/2022                                                               Page 47 of 47