Title: P. Chidambaram vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 5 September, 2019
URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/90251163/
Court: Unknown
Date: Unknown

================================================================================

Supreme Court of India
P. Chidambaram vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 5 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4198, 2019 (9) SCC 24, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1001, 2019 CRI LJ 4754, 2019 (6) ADR 401, (2019) 12 SCALE 94, (2019) 3 CRIMES 410, 2019 (3) SCC (CRI) 509, (2019) 4 BOMCR(CRI) 809, (2019) 4 MAD LJ(CRI) 188, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 19, (2019) 4 RECCRIR 875, (2019) 76 OCR 498, AIR 2019 SC( CRI) 1539
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
A.S. Bopanna
R. Banumathi
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1340 2019
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.7523 of 2019)
P. CHIDAMBARAM                                                    ...Appellant
VERSUS
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT                                       …Respondent
JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2.                  This appeal relates to the alleged irregularities in Foreign Investment
Promotion Board (FIPB) clearance given to the INX Media for receiving
foreign investment to the tune of Rs.305 crores against approved inflow of
Rs.4.62 crores. The High Court of Delhi rejected the appellant’s plea for
anticipatory bail in the case registered by Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) being RC No.220/2017-E-0011 under
Section 120B
IPC read with
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Section 420
IPC,
Section 8
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.09.05
14:14:59 IST
Reason:
the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
. By the impugned order dated
20.08.2019, the High Court also refused to grant anticipatory bail in the
case registered by the Enforcement Directorate in ECIR No.07/HIU/2017
punishable under
Sections 3
and
of the Prevention of Money-Laundering
Act, 2002.
3.   Grievance of the appellant is that against the impugned order of the
High Court, the appellant tried to get the matter listed in the Supreme Court
on 21.08.2019; but the appellant could not get an urgent hearing in the
Supreme Court seeking stay of the impugned order of the High Court. The
appellant was arrested by the CBI on the night of 21.08.2019. Since the
appellant was arrested and remanded to custody in CBI case, in view of the
judgment of the Constitution Bench in
Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and
others v. State of Punjab
(1980) 2 SCC 565, the appellant cannot seek
anticipatory bail after he is arrested. Accordingly, SLP(Crl.)
No.7525 of
2019 preferred by the appellant qua the CBI case was dismissed as
infructuous vide order dated 26.08.2019 on the ground that the appellant
has already been arrested and remanded to custody. This Court granted
liberty to the appellant to work out his remedy in accordance with law.
4.   On 15.05.2017, CBI registered FIR in RC No.220/2017-E-0011 under
Section 120B
IPC read with
Section 420
IPC,
Section 8
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
against the accused viz. (i) INX Media through its Director Indrani
Mukherjea; (ii) INX News through its Director Sh. Pratim Mukherjea @
Peter Mukherjea and others; (iii) Sh. Karti P. Chidambaram; (iv) Chess
Management Services through its Director Sh. Karti P. Chidambaram and
others; (v) Advantage Strategic Consulting through its Director Ms. Padma
Vishwanathan @ Padma Bhaskararaman and others; (vi) unknown
officers/officials of Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India; and (vii) other
unknown persons for the alleged irregularities in giving FIPB’s clearance to
INX Media to receive overseas funds of Rs.305 crores against approved
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) of Rs.4.62 crores.
5.   Case of the prosecution in the predicate offence is that in 2007, INX
Media Pvt. Ltd. approached Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB)
seeking approval for FDI upto 46.216 per cent of the issued equity capital.
While sending the proposal by INX Media to be placed before the FIPB,
INX Media had clearly mentioned in it the inflow of FDI to the extent of
Rs.4,62,16,000/- taking the proposed issue at its face value. The FIPB in
its meeting held on 18.05.2007 recommended the proposal of INX Media
subject to the approval of the Finance Minister-the appellant.       In the
meeting, the Board did not approve the downstream investment by INX
Media in INX News.     In violation of the conditions of the approval, the
recommendation of FIPB:- (i) INX Media deliberately made a downstream
investment to the extent of 26% in the capital of INX News Ltd. without
specific approval of FIPB which included indirect foreign investment by the
same Foreign Investors; (ii) generated more than Rs.305 crores FDI in INX
Media which is in clear violation of the approved foreign flow of Rs.4.62
6.   Upon receipt of a complaint on the basis of a cheque for an amount of
Rs.10,00,000/- made in favour of M/s Advantage Strategic Consulting
Private Limited (ASCPL) by INX Media, the investigation wing of the
Income Tax Department proceeded to investigate the matter and the
relevant information was sought from the FIPB, which in turn, vide its letter
dated 26.05.2008 sought clarification from the INX Media which justified its
action saying that the downstream investment has been authorised and that
the same was made in accordance with the approval of FIPB. It is alleged
by the prosecution that in order to get out of the situation without any penal
provision, INX Media entered into a criminal conspiracy with Sh. Karti
Chidambaram, Promoter Director, Chess Management Services Pvt. Ltd.
and the appellant-the then Finance Minister of India. INX Media through
the letter dated 26.06.2008 tried to justify their action stating that the
downstream investment has been approved and the same was made in
accordance with approval.
7.   The FIR further alleges that for the services rendered by Sh. Karti
Chidambaram to INX Media through Chess Management Services in
getting the issues scuttled by influencing the public servants of FIPB unit of
the Ministry of Finance, consideration in the form of payments were
received against invoices raised on INX Media by ASCPL. It is alleged in
the FIR that the very reason for getting the invoices raised in the name of
ASCPL for the services rendered by Chess Management Services was with
a view to conceal the identity of Sh. Karti Chidambaram inasmuch as on the
day when the invoices were raised and payment was received. It is stated
that Sh. Karti Chidambaram was the Promoter, Director of Chess
Management Services whereas ASCPL was being controlled by him
indirectly. It is alleged that the invoices approximately for an amount of
Rs.3.50 crores were falsely got raised in favour of INX Media in the name of
other companies in which Sh. Karti Chidambaram was having sustainable
interest either directly or indirectly. It is alleged that such invoices were
falsely got raised for creation of acquisition of media content, consultancy in
respect of market research, acquisition of content of various genre of Audio-
Video etc. It is alleged that INX Media Group in his record has clearly
mentioned the purpose of payment of Rs.10,00,000/- to ASCPL as towards
“management      consultancy   charges     towards   FIPB    notification   and
clarification”. Alleging that the above acts of omission and commission
prima facie disclose commission of offence, CBI has registered FIR in RC
No.220/2017-E-0011 on 15.05.2017 under Section 120B read with
Section
IPC,
Section 8
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against the aforesaid accused.
8.   On the basis of the said FIR registered by CBI, the Enforcement
Directorate registered a case in ECIR No.07/HIU/2017 against the
aforesaid accused persons for allegedly committing the offence punishable
under
Sections 3
and
of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
(PMLA).    Ever since the registration of the cases in 2017, there were
various proceedings seeking bail and number of other proceedings pending
filed by Sh. Karti Chidambaram and other accused. Finally, the Delhi High
Court granted bail to Sh. Karti Chidambaram in INX Media case filed by CBI
on 23.03.2018. Thereafter, the appellant moved Delhi High Court seeking
anticipatory bail both in CBI case and also in money-laundering case filed
by Enforcement Directorate. On 25.07.2018, the Delhi High Court granted
the appellant interim protection from arrest in both the cases and the same
was extended till 20.08.2019 – the date on which the High Court dismissed
the appellant’s petition refusing to grant anticipatory bail.
9.   The High Court dismissed the application refusing to grant
anticipatory bail to the appellant by holding that “it is a classic case of
money-laundering”. The High Court observed that “it is a clear case of
money-laundering”. The learned Single Judge dismissed the application for
anticipatory bail by holding “that the alleged irregularities committed by the
appellant makes out a prima facie case for refusing pre-arrest bail to the
appellant”.    The learned Single Judge also held that “considering the
gravity of the offence and the evasive reply given by the appellant to the
questions put to him while he was under the protective cover extended to
him by the court are the twin factors which weigh to deny the pre-arrest bail
to the appellant”. Being aggrieved, the appellant has preferred this appeal.
10.    Lengthy arguments were heard on number of hearings stretched over
for long time. Learned Senior counsel appearing for the appellant Mr. Kapil
Sibal and Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi made meticulous submissions on the
concept of life and liberty enshrined in
Article 21
of the Constitution of India
to urge that the appellant is entitled to the privilege of anticipatory bail.
Arguments were also advanced on various aspects – whether the court can
look   into   the   materials   produced   by the    respondent-Enforcement
Directorate to seek custody of the appellant when the appellant was not
confronted with those documents on the three dates of interrogation of the
appellant     conducted   on    19.12.2018,   01.01.2019    and    21.01.2019.
Interlocutory application was filed by the appellant to produce the
transcripts of the questions put to the appellant and the answers given by
the appellant, recorded by Enforcement Directorate. Countering the above
submissions, Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General made the
submissions that grant of anticipatory bail is not part of
Article 21
of the
Constitution of India. Mr. Tushar Mehta urged that having regard to the
materials collected by the respondent-Enforcement Directorate and the
specific inputs and in view of the provisions of the special enactment-
PMLA, custodial interrogation of the appellant is required and the appellant
is not entitled to the privilege of anticipatory bail.
Contention of Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel:-
11.   Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant submitted that the clearance for INX FDI was approved by
Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) consisting of six Secretaries
and the appellant as the then Finance Minister granted approval in the
normal course of official business. The learned Senior counsel submitted
that the crux of the allegation is that the appellant’s son Sh. Karti
Chidambaram tried to influence the officials of FIPB for granting ex-post
facto approval for downstream investment by INX Media to INX News;
whereas neither the Board members of FIPB nor the officials of FIPB have
stated anything about the appellant’s son Sh. Karti Chidambaram that he
approached and influenced them for ex-post facto approval. The learned
Senior counsel contended that the entire case alleges about money paid to
Director in the said ASCPL; but the Enforcement Directorate has falsely
alleged that Sh. Karti Chidambaram has been controlling the company-
ASCPL. It was submitted that the appellant has nothing to do with the said
ASCPL to whom money has been paid by INX Media.
12.   Taking us through the impugned judgment and the note said to have
been submitted by the Enforcement Directorate before the High Court, the
learned Senior counsel submitted that the learned Single Judge has
“copied and pasted” paragraphs after paragraphs of the note given by the
respondent in the court.    It was urged that there was no basis for the
allegations contained in the said note to substantiate the alleged
transactions/transfer of money as stated in the tabular column given in the
impugned order.
13.   So far as the sealed cover containing the materials sought to be
handed over by the Enforcement Directorate, the learned Senior counsel
raised strong objections and submitted that the Enforcement Directorate
cannot randomly produce the documents in the court “behind the back” of
the appellant for seeking custody of the appellant. Strong objections were
raised for the plea of Enforcement Directorate requesting the court to
receive the sealed cover and for looking into the documents/material
collected during the investigation allegedly showing the trail of money in the
name of companies and the money-laundering.
14.   The appellant was interrogated by the respondent on three dates viz.
19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019. So far as the observation of the
High Court that the appellant was “evasive” during interrogation, the
learned Senior counsel submitted that the appellant has well cooperated
with the respondent and the respondent cannot allege that the appellant
was “non-cooperative”. On behalf of the appellant, an application has also
been filed seeking direction to the respondent to produce the transcripts of
the questioning conducted on 19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019.
The learned Senior counsel submitted that the transcripts will show whether
the appellant was “evasive” or not during his questioning as alleged by the
respondent.
15.   Learned Senior counsel submitted that the provision for anticipatory
bail i.e.
Section 438
Cr.P.C. has to be interpreted in a fair and reasonable
manner and while so, the High Court has mechanically rejected the
anticipatory bail. It was further submitted that in case of offences of the
nature alleged, everything is borne out by the records and there is no
question of the appellant being “evasive”. The learned Senior counsel also
submitted     that   co-accused     Sh.    Karti   Chidambaram   and   Padma
Bhaskararaman were granted bail and the other accused Indrani Mukherjea
and Sh. Pratim Mukherjea @ Peter Mukherjea are on statutory bail and the
appellant is entitled to bail on parity also.
Contention of Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior counsel:-
16.   Reiterating the submission of Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Abhishek Manu
Singhvi, learned Senior counsel submitted that the Enforcement Directorate
cannot say that the appellant was “non-cooperative” and “evasive”. Mr.
Singhvi also urged for production of transcripts i.e. questions put to the
appellant and the answers which would show whether the appellant has
properly responded to the questions or not.         Placing reliance upon
Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla
(1976) 2 SCC
521, the learned Senior counsel submitted that the respondent cannot rely
upon the documents without furnishing those documents to the appellant or
without questioning the appellant about the materials collected during the
investigation.   Reiterating the submission of Mr. Sibal, Mr. Singhvi
contended that the High Court has denied anticipatory bail to the appellant
on the basis of materials produced by the respondent in the cover before
the court which were never shown to the appellant nor was the appellant
confronted with the same. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the
alleged occurrence was of the year 2007-08 and
Sections 420
IPC and
120B
IPC
and
Section 13
of the Prevention of Corruption Act were not part
of the “scheduled offence” of
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act
in 2008
and were introduced by a notification dated 01.06.2009 and in view of the
protection given under
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution of India, there can
never be a retrospective operation of a criminal/penal statute.
Placing
reliance upon
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh and another v. State of Vindhya
Pradesh
AIR 1953 SC 394, it was contended that the appellant has to
substantiate the contention that the acts charged as offences were offences
“at the time of commission of the offence”. The learned Senior counsel
urged that in 2007-2008 when the alleged acts of commission and omission
were committed, they were not “scheduled offences” and hence
prosecution under
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
is not
maintainable.
17.   The learned Senior counsel has taken strong exception to the two
factors stated by the High Court in the impugned order for denying pre-
arrest bail i.e. (i) gravity of the offence; and (ii) the appellant was “evasive”
to deny the anticipatory bail. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the
“gravity of the offence” cannot be the perception of the individual or the
court and the test for “gravity of the offence” should be the punishment
prescribed by the statute for the offence committed. Insofar as the finding
of the High Court that “the appellant was evasive to the questions”, the
learned   Senior    counsel   submitted     that   the   investigating   agency-
Enforcement Directorate cannot expect an accused to give answers in the
manner they want and that the accused is entitled to protection under
Article 20(3)
of the Constitution of India.        Reliance was placed upon
Santosh s/o
Dwarkadas Fafat v. State of Maharashtra
(2017) 9 SCC 714.
Contention of Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General:-
18.   Taking us through the Statement of Objects and Reasons and salient
features of the PMLA, the learned Solicitor General submitted that India is a
part of the global community having responsibility to crackdown on money-
laundering with an effective legislation and PMLA is a result of the joint
initiatives taken by several nations. Taking us through the various
provisions of the PMLA, the learned Solicitor General submitted that
money-laundering poses a serious threat to the financial system and
financial integrity of the nation and has to be sternly dealt with. It was
submitted that PMLA offence has two dimensions – predicate offence and
money-laundering. Money-laundering is a separate and independent
offence punishable under
Section 4
read with
Section 3
of the PMLA.
19.   Learned Solicitor General submitted that under
Section 19
of PMLA,
specified officers, on the basis of material in possession, having reason to
believe which is to be recorded in writing that the person has been guilty of
the offence under the Act, have power to arrest. It was urged that the power
to arrest and necessary safeguards are enshrined under
Section 19
of the
Act. It was submitted that since respondent has collected cogent materials
to show that it is a case of money-laundering and the Enforcement
Directorate has issued Letter rogatory and if the Court intervenes by
granting anticipatory bail, the authority cannot exercise the statutory right of
arrest and interrogate the appellant.
20.   The learned Solicitor General submitted that they have obtained
specific inputs from overseas banks and also about the companies and
properties and it is a clear case of money-laundering. The learned Solicitor
General submitted that the Court has power to look into the materials so
with the appellant at this initial stage when the Court is considering the
matter for grant of pre-arrest bail. Relying upon number of judgments, the
learned Solicitor General has submitted that as a matter of practice, Courts
have always perused the case diaries produced by the prosecution and
receive and peruse the materials/documents to satisfy its judicial
conscience.
In support of his contention, learned Solicitor General
placed
reliance upon
Romila Thapar and Others v. Union of India and Others
(2018) 10 SCC 753, Jai Prakash Singh v. State of Bihar and Another (
2012)
4 SCC 379 and Directorate of Enforcement and Another v. P.V. Prabhakar
Rao
(1997) 6 SCC 647 and other judgments and requested the Court to
peruse the materials produced by the Enforcement Directorate in the
sealed cover.
21.   Opposing the grant of anticipatory bail, the learned Solicitor General
submitted that the Enforcement Directorate has cogent evidence to prove
that it is a case of money-laundering and there is a need of custodial
interrogation of the appellant. The learned Solicitor General submitted that
the economic offences stand as a class apart and custodial interrogation is
required for the Enforcement Directorate to trace the trail of money and
prayed for dismissal of the appeal.
22.   As noted earlier, the predicate offences are under
Sections 120B
IPC
and 420
IPC
Section 8
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
Prevention of Corruption Act. Case is registered against the appellant and
others under
Sections 3
and
of PMLA.           The main point falling for
consideration is whether the appellant is entitled to the privilege of
anticipatory bail. In order to consider whether the appellant is to be granted
the privilege of anticipatory bail, it is necessary to consider the salient
features of the special enactment –
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act,
23.
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002
– Special Enactment:-
Money-laundering is the process of concealing illicit sources of money and
the launderer transforming the money proceeds derived from criminal
activity into funds and moved to other institution or transformed into
legitimate asset. It is realised world around that money laundering poses a
serious threat not only to the financial systems of the countries but also to
their integrity and sovereignty.
The Prevention of Money-laundering Act,
was enacted in pursuance of the Political Declaration adopted by the
Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly held in June
1998, calling upon the Member States to adopt national money-laundering
legislation and programme, primarily with a view to meet out the serious
threat posed by money laundering to the financial system of the countries
and to their integrity and sovereignty.
24.   Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002 recognises that money laundering poses a serious
threat not only to the financial systems of the countries but also to their
integrity and sovereignty.    PMLA is a special enactment containing the
provisions with adequate safeguards with a view to prevent money-
laundering. The Preamble to the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
states that “
An Act
to prevent money-laundering and to provide for
confiscation of property derived from, or involved in, money-laundering and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
25.   Chapter II of PMLA contains provisions relating to the offences of
money-laundering.
Section 2(1)(p)
of PMLA defines “money-laundering”
that it has the same meaning assigned to it in
Section 3
Section 2(1)(ra)
PMLA defines “offence of cross border implications”. To prevent offences of
“cross border implications”, PMLA contains
Sections 55
dealing with
reciprocal arrangement for assistance in certain matters and procedure for
attachment and confiscation of property between the contracting States
with regard to the offences of money-laundering and predicate offences.
Section 2(1)(y)
of PMLA defines “scheduled offence” which reads as
under:-
“2. Definitions –
(1)……
(y) “scheduled offence” means –
(i) the offences specified under Part A of the Scheduled; or
(ii) the offences specified under Part B of the Schedule if the total value
involved in such offences is one crore rupees or more; or
(iii)the offences specified under Part C of the Schedule.”
“Scheduled Offence” is a sine qua non for the offence of money-laundering
which would generate the money that is being laundered. PMLA contains
Schedules which originally contained three parts namely Part A, Part B and
Part C.    Part A contains various paragraphs which enumerate offences
under the
Indian Penal Code, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985
, offences under the
Explosives Substances Act, 1908
and the
offences under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(paragraph 8) etc.
The Schedule was amended by Act 21 of 2009 (w.e.f. 01.06.2009).
Section
of Prevention of Corruption Act was inserted in the Part A of the
Schedule to PMLA by the
Amendment Act, 16
of 2018 (w.e.f. 26.07.2018).
26.
Section 3
of PMLA stipulates “money-laundering” to be an offence.
Section 3
of PMLA states that whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to
indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in
any process or activity connected with the proceeds of the crime and
projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty of the offences of money
laundering.   The provisions of the PMLA including
Section 3
have
undergone various amendments.         The words in
Section 3
“with the
proceeds of crime and projecting” has been amended as “proceeds of
crime including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and
projecting or claiming” by the Amendment Act 2 of 2013 (w.e.f. 15.02.2013).
27.
Section 4
of PMLA deals with punishment for money laundering. Prior
to Amendment Act 2 of 2013,
Section 4
provided punishment with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to seven years and the fine which may extend to Rs.5,00,000/-.
By Amendment Act 2 of 2013,
Section 4
is amended w.e.f. 15.02.2013 vide
S.O. 343(E) dated 08.02.2013.      Now, the punishment prescribed under
Section 4
of PMLA to the offender is rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and
the offender is also liable to pay fine. The limit of fine has been done away
with and now after the amendment, appropriate fine even above
Rs.5,00,000/- can be imposed against the offender.
28.
Section 5
of PMLA which provides for attachment of property involved
in money laundering, states that where the Director or any other officer not
below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the
purposes of this Section, has “reason to believe” (the reason for such
belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his
possession, that (a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime;
and (b) such proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred or
dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings
relating to confiscation of such proceeds of crime under Chapter III, he may,
by order in writing, provisionally attach such property for a period not
exceeding one hundred and fifty days from the date of the order, in such
manner as may be prescribed. Section 5 provides that no such order of
attachment shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a
report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under Section 173 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or a complaint has been filed by a
person authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in that Schedule,
before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence,
as the case may be.
29.   The term “reason to believe” is not defined in PMLA. The expression
“reason to believe” has been defined in
Section 26
of IPC. As per the
definition in
Section 26
IPC, a person is said to have “reason to believe” a
thing, if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise. The
specified officer must have “reason to believe” on the basis of material in
his possession that the property sought to be attached is likely to be
concealed, transferred or dealt with in a manner which may result in
frustrating any proceedings for confiscation of their property under the Act.
It is stated that in the present case, exercising power under
Section 5
of the
PMLA, the Adjudicating Authority had attached some of the properties of
the appellant. Challenging the attachment, the appellant and others are
said to have preferred appeal before the Appellate Tribunal and stay has
been granted by the Appellate Authority and the said appeal is stated to be
pending.
30.   As rightly submitted by the learned Solicitor General, sufficient
safeguards are provided under the provisions of PMLA. Under
Section 5
PMLA, the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy
Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of
Section 5
who
passed the impugned order is required to have “reason to believe” that the
properties sought to be attached would be transferred or dealt with in a
manner which would frustrate the proceedings relating to confiscation of
such properties. Further, the officer who passed the order of attachment is
required to record the reasons for such belief. The provisions of the PMLA
provisional attachment of property along with material under sub-section (2)
Section 5
of PMLA to the Adjudicating Authority.
31.   In order to ensure the safeguards, in exercise of power under
Section
of PMLA, the Central Government has framed “The Prevention of
Reasons along with the Material in respect of Survey, to the Adjudicating
Authority and its period of Retention) Rules, 2005”.     Rule 3 of the said
attachment of property along with the material under sub-section (2) of
Section 5
of the Act to the Adjudicating Authority. Rule 3 stipulates various
safeguards as to the confidentiality of the sealed envelope sent to the
Adjudicating Authority.
32.
Section 17
of PMLA deals with the search and seizure.
Section 17
which deals with search and seizure states that where the Director or any
other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for the
purposes of this section on the basis of the information in his possession
has “reason to believe” (reason for such belief to be recorded in
writing) that any person has committed an offence which constitutes the
money laundering or is in possession of any proceeds of crime involved in
money laundering etc. may search building, place and seize any record or
property found as a result of such search.
Section 17
of PMLA also uses
the expression “reason to believe” and “reason for such belief to be
recorded in writing”. Here again, the authorised officer shall immediately
the reasons so recorded along with the material in his possession to the
Adjudicating Authority in a “sealed envelope” in the manner as may be
prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such reasons and
material for such period as may be prescribed. In order to ensure the
sanctity of the search and seizure and to ensure the safeguards, in exercise
of power under
Section 73
of PMLA, the Central Government has framed
“The Prevention of Money-Laundering (Forms, Search and Seizure or
Freezing and the Manner of Forwarding the Reasons and Material to the
Adjudicating Authority, Impounding and Custody of Records and the period
of Retention) Rules, 2005”.
33.
Section 19
of PMLA deals with the power of the specified officer to
arrest. Under sub-section (1) of
Section 19
of PMLA, the specified officer
viz. the Director, the Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any other officer
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special
order, on the basis of the material in possession, having “reason to
believe” and “reasons for such belief be recorded in writing” that the
person has been guilty of offence punishable under the PMLA, has power
to arrest such person.    The authorised officer is required to inform the
accused the grounds for such arrest at the earliest and in terms of sub-
section (3) of
Section 19
of the Act, the arrested person is required to be
produced to the jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate
within 24 hours excluding the journey time from the place of arrest to the
Magistrate’s Court. In order to ensure the safeguards, in exercise of power
under
Section 73
of the Act, the Central Government has framed “The
Prevention of Money-Laundering (The Forms and the Manner of
the Adjudicating Authority and its Period of Retention) Rules, 2005”. Rule 3
arrest and the material to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed cover
marked “confidential” and Rule 3 provides for the manner in maintaining the
confidentiality of the contents.
34.   As rightly submitted by Mr. Tushar Mehta, the procedure under PMLA
for arrest ensures sufficient safeguards viz.:- (i) only the specified officers
are authorised to arrest; (ii) based on “reasons to believe” that an offence
punishable under the Act has been committed; (iii) the reasons for such
belief to be recorded in writing; (iv) evidence and the material submitted to
the Adjudicating Authority in sealed envelope in the manner as may be
prescribed ensuring the safeguards in maintaining the confidentiality; and
(v) every person arrested under PMLA to be produced before the Judicial
Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate within 24 hours.
Section 19
of PMLA
provides for the power to arrest to the specified officer on the basis of
material in his possession and has “reason to believe” and the “reasons
for such belief to be recorded in writing” that any person has been guilty
of an offence punishable under PMLA.         The statutory power has been
vested upon the specified officers of higher rank to arrest the person whom
the officer has “reason to believe” that such person has been guilty of an
offence punishable under PMLA.        In cases of PMLA, in exercising the
power to grant anticipatory bail would be to scuttle the statutory power of
the specified officers to arrest which is enshrined in the statute with
sufficient safeguards.
35.
Section 71
of PMLA gives overriding effect to the provisions of PMLA.
Section 71
of PMLA states that the provisions of the Act would have
overriding effect on the provisions of all other Acts applicable.         The
provisions of PMLA shall prevail over the contrary provisions of the other
Acts.
Section 65
of PMLA states that the provisions of
Code of Criminal
Procedure
, 1973 shall apply to the provisions under the Act insofar as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of PMLA.
36.   Insofar as the issue of grant of bail is concerned,
Section 45
of PMLA
starts with non-obstante clause.
Section 45
imposes two conditions for
grant of bail to any person accused of any offence punishable for a term of
imprisonment of more than three years under Part-A of the Schedule of the
Act viz., (i) that the prosecutor must be given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such bail; (ii) that the court must be satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accused persons is not guilty of
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
37.    The twin conditions under
Section 45(1)
for the offences classified
thereunder in Part-A of the Schedule was held arbitrary and discriminatory
and invalid in
Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India and another
(2018)
11 SCC 1. Insofar as the twin conditions for release of accused on bail
under
Section 45
of the Act, the Supreme Court held the same to be
unconstitutional as it violates
Articles 14
and
of the Constitution of India.
Subsequently,
Section 45
has been amended by Amendment Act 13 of
2008. The words “imprisonment for a term of imprisonment of more than
three years under Part A of the Schedule” has been substituted with
“accused of an offence under this Act…..”.
Section 45
prior to Nikesh
Tarachand and post Nikesh Tarachand reads as under:-
Section 45
- Prior to Nikesh Tarachand Shah
Section 45
- Post Nikesh Tarachand Shah
Section 45
. Offence to be cognizable and non-
Section 45
. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
bailable.                                               (2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
(1) Notwithstanding contained in the
Code of                Criminal Procedure
, 1973                   (2 of 1974), no
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no                person accused of an offence under this Act shall
person accused of an offence punishable                 be released on bail or on his own bond unless-
for a term of imprisonment of more than                     (i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an
three years under Part A of the Schedule                    opportunity to oppose the application for such
shall be released on bail or on his own                     release; and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the
bond unless-
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given                application, the court is satisfied that there are
an opportunity to oppose the application                reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
for such release; and                                   guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes                commit any offence while on bail;
the application, the court is satisfied that   Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen
there are reasonable grounds for               years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, or is accused either
believing that he is not guilty of such        on his own or along with other co-accused of money
offence and that he is not likely to           laundering a sum of less than one crore rupees may be
commit any offence while on bail;              released on bail, if the Special court so directs:
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of
sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm,
may be released on bail, if the Special Court so
directs:
38.    The occurrence was of the year 2007-2008. CBI registered the case
against Sh. Karti Chidambaram, the appellant and others on 15.05.2017
under
Sections 120-B
IPC read with
Section 420
IPC and under
Section 8
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act. Learned Senior counsel for the appellant, Mr. A.M. Singhvi
has submitted that there could not have been ‘reasons to believe’ that the
appellant has committed the offence under
Section 3
of PMLA, since in
2007-2008 the time of commission of alleged offence,
Sections 120-B
IPC
and 420
IPC
and
Section 13
of the Prevention of Corruption Act were not
there in Part ‘A’ of the Schedule to PMLA and were included in Part ‘A’ of
the Schedule only by Amendment Act 21 of 2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and
w.e.f. 26.07.2018 respectively and therefore, no prima-facie case of
commission of offence by the appellant under PMLA is made out. It was
urged that under
Article 20
of the Constitution, no person shall be convicted
of any offence except for violation of law in force at the time of the
commission of that act charged as offence. When
Section 120B
IPC and
Section 420
IPC and
Section 13
of Prevention of Corruption Act were not
then included in Part A of the Schedule, in 2007-2008, then the appellant
and others cannot be said to have committed the offence under PMLA.
Insofar as
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act is concerned, it was
submitted that
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act is not attracted
against the appellant as there are no allegations in the FIR that the
appellant accepted or agreed to accept any gratification as a motive or
reward for inducing any public servant and hence, the accusation under
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act does not apply to the
appellant. It was further submitted that even assuming
Section 8
of the
Prevention of Corruption Act is made out, the amount allegedly paid to
ASCPL was only Rs.10,00,000/- whereas, Rs.30,00,000/- was the amount
then stipulated to attract
Section 8
to be the Scheduled offence under Part
A of the Schedule to the Act and therefore, there was no basis for offence
against the appellant and in such view of the matter, the appellant is entitled
for anticipatory bail.
39.   Section 45 of the PMLA makes the offence of money laundering
cognizable and non-bailable and no person accused of an offence
punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part
A of the Schedule shall be released on bail unless the twin conditions
thereon are satisfied.
Section 120-B
IPC – Criminal Conspiracy and
Section 420
IPC - Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property
were included in Part A of the Schedule to PMLA by way of Amendment Act
21 of 2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and by way of Amendment Act 2 of 2013 w.e.f.
15.02.2013. Likewise,
Section 13
of the Prevention of Corruption Act has
been introduced to Part A of the Schedule (Paragraph 8) by way of
Amendment Act 16 of 2018 w.e.f. 26.07.2018. As pointed out earlier, the
FIR was registered by CBI under
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption
Act also which was then in Part A of the Schedule at the time of alleged
commission of offence.
40.   Learned Senior counsel submitted that since the offence under
Sections 120-B
IPC and 420
IPC
and under
Section 13
of Prevention of
Corruption Act were included in the Schedule only w.e.f. 01.06.2009 and
w.e.f. 26.07.2018 respectively and there can never be a retrospective
operation of a criminal/penal statue and the test is not whether the
proceeds are retained by the person; but the test as
laid down by
the
Constitution Bench of this Court is, the test of the acts constituting the
offence at the time of the commission of the offence and the appellant
cannot be proceeded with prosecution under PMLA in violation of
constitutional protection under
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution of India.
41.   Under
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution, no person shall be convicted of
any offence except for violation of law in force at the time of commission of
that act charged as an offence. FIR for the predicate offence has been
registered by CBI under
Section 120B
IPC, 420
IPC
and
Section 13
of the
Prevention of Corruption Act and also under
Section 8
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act. As discussed earlier,
Section 120B
IPC and
Section 420
IPC were included in Part A of the Schedule only by Amendment Act 21 of
2009 w.e.f. 01.06.2009.
Section 13
of the Prevention of Corruption Act was
included in Part A of the Schedule by Amendment Act 16 of 2018 w.e.f.
26.07.2018.
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act is punishable with
imprisonment extending upto seven years.
Section 8
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act was very much available in Part A of the Schedule of PMLA
at the time of alleged commission of offence in 2007-2008. It cannot
therefore be said that the appellant is proceeded against in violation of
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution of India for the alleged commission of the
acts which was not an offence as per law then in existence. The merits of
the contention that
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act cannot be
the predicate offence qua the appellant, cannot be gone into at this stage
when this Court is only considering the prayer for anticipatory bail.
42.   Yet another contention advanced on behalf of the appellant is that
minimum threshold for the Enforcement Directorate to acquire jurisdiction at
the relevant time was Rs.30 lakhs whereas, in the present case, there is no
material to show any payment apart from the sum of Rs.10 lakhs
(approximately) allegedly paid by INX Media to ASCPL with which the
appellant is said to be having no connection whatsoever. The merits of the
contention that
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act (then included
in Schedule A of the PMLA in 2007-08) whether attracted or not and
whether the Enforcement Directorate had the threshold to acquire
jurisdiction under PMLA cannot be considered at this stage while this Court
is considering only the prayer for anticipatory bail.
43.   In terms of
Section 4
of the PMLA, the offence of money-laundering is
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than three years
extending to seven years and with fine.        The Second Schedule to the
Criminal Procedure Code
relates to classification of offences against other
laws and in terms of the Second Schedule of the Code, an offence which is
punishable with imprisonment for three years and upward but not more than
seven years is a cognizable and non-bailable offence. Thus,
Section 4
the Act read with the Second Schedule of the Code makes it clear that the
offences under the PMLA are cognizable offences. As pointed out earlier,
Section 8
of the Prevention of Corruption Act was then found a mention in
Part ‘A’ of the Schedule       (Paragraph 8).
Section 8
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act is punishable for a term extending to seven years. Thus, the
essential requirement of Section 45 of PMLA “accused of an offence
punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part
‘A’ of the Schedule” is satisfied making the offence under PMLA. There is
no merit in the contention of the appellant that very registration of the FIR
against the appellant under PMLA is not maintainable.
Whether Court can look into the documents/materials collected during
investigation
44.   During the course of lengthy hearing, much arguments were
advanced mainly on the question whether the court can look into the
documents and materials produced by the prosecution before the court
without first confronting the accused with those materials.
45.   The learned Solicitor General submitted that during investigation, the
Enforcement Directorate has collected materials and overseas banks have
given specific inputs regarding the companies and properties that money
has been parked in the name of shell companies and the said money has
been used to make legitimate assets and that custodial interrogation is
necessary with regard to the materials so collected. The learned Solicitor
General sought to produce the materials so collected in the sealed cover
and requested the court to peruse the documents and the materials to
satisfy the conscience of the court as to the necessity for the custodial
interrogation.
46.   Contention of learned Solicitor General requesting the court to peruse
the documents produced in the sealed cover was strongly objected by the
appellant on the grounds :– (i) that the Enforcement Directorate cannot
randomly place the documents in the court behind the back of the accused
to seek custody of the accused; (ii) the materials so collected by
Enforcement Directorate during investigation cannot be placed before the
court unless the accused has been confronted with such materials.
47.   Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior counsel submitted that the statements
recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C. are part of the case diary and the case
diary must reflect day to day movement of the investigation based on which
the investigating agency came to the conclusion that the crime has been
committed so that a final report can be filed before the court. The learned
Senior counsel submitted that during the course of such investigation, the
investigating officer may discover several documents which may have a
bearing on the crime committed; however the documents themselves can
never be the part of the case diary and the documents would be a piece of
documentary evidence during trial which would be required to be proved in
accordance with the provisions of the
Evidence Act
before such documents
can be relied upon for the purpose of supporting the case of prosecution.
Enforcement Directorate does not maintain a case diary; but maintain the
file with paginated pages. It was urged that even assuming that there is a
case diary maintained by the respondent in conformity with
Section 172
Cr.P.C., the opinion of the investigating officer for the conclusion reached by
the authorised officer under PMLA, can never be relied upon for the
purposes of consideration of anticipatory bail.
48.   Having regard to the submissions, two points arise for consideration –
(i) whether the court can/cannot look into the documents/materials
produced before the court unless the accused was earlier confronted with
those documents/materials?; and (ii) whether the court is called upon to
hold a mini inquiry during the intermediary stages of investigation by
examining whether the questions put to the accused are ‘satisfactory’ or
‘evasive’, etc.?
49.   Sub-section (2) of
Section 172
Cr.P.C. permits any court to send for
case diary to use them in the trial.
Section 172(3)
Cr.P.C. specifically
provides that neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for
case diary nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they
are referred to by the court. But if they are used by the police officer who
made them to refresh his memory or if the court uses them for the purpose
of contradicting the such police officer, the provisions of Section 161
Crl.P.C. or the provision of
Section 145
of the Evidence Act shall be
complied with. In this regard, the learned Solicitor General
placed reliance
upon
Balakram v. State of Uttarakhand and others (2017) 7 SCC 668.
Observing that the confidentiality is always kept in the matter of
investigation and it is not desirable to make available the police diary to the
accused on his demand, in Balakram, the Supreme Court held as under:-
“15. The police diary is only a record of day-to-day investigation made by
the investigating officer. Neither the accused nor his agent is entitled to call
for such case diary and also are not entitled to see them during the course
of inquiry or trial. The unfettered power conferred by the statute under
Section 172(2)
CrPC on the court to examine the entries of the police diary
would not allow the accused to claim similar unfettered right to inspect the
case diary.
……….
17. From the aforementioned, it is clear that the denial of right to the
accused to inspect the case diary cannot be characterised as unreasonable
or arbitrary. The confidentiality is always kept in the matter of investigation
and it is not desirable to make available the police diary to the accused on
his demand.”
50.    Reiterating the same principles in
Sidharth and others v. State of
Bihar
(2005) 12 SCC 545, the Supreme Court held as under:-
“27. Lastly, we may point out that in the present case, we have noticed that
the entire case diary maintained by the police was made available to the
accused. Under
Section 172
of the Criminal Procedure Code, every police
officer making an investigation has to record his proceedings in a diary
setting forth the time at which the information reached him, the time at which
he began and closed his investigation, the place or places visited by him
and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation.
It is specifically provided in sub-clause (3) of Section 172 that neither the
accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries nor shall he
or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the
court, but if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his
memory, or if the court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such
police officer, the provisions of
Section 161
CrPC or the provisions of
Section 145
of the Evidence Act shall be complied with. The court is
empowered to call for such diaries not to use it as evidence but to use it as
aid to find out anything that happened during the investigation of the crime.
These provisions have been incorporated in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
to achieve certain specific objectives. The police officer who is conducting
the investigation may come across a series of information which cannot be
divulged to the accused. He is bound to record such facts in the case diary.
But if the entire case diary is made available to the accused, it may cause
serious prejudice to others and even affect the safety and security of those
who may have given statements to the police. The confidentiality is always
kept in the matter of criminal investigation and it is not desirable to make
available the entire case diary to the accused. In the instant case, we have
noticed that the entire case diary was given to the accused and the
investigating officer was extensively cross-examined on many facts which
were not very much relevant for the purpose of the case. The learned
Sessions Judge should have been careful in seeing that the trial of the case
was conducted in accordance with the provisions of
CrPC
.” [underlining
added]
The same position has been reiterated in
Naresh Kumar Yadav v. Ravindra
Kumar and others
(2008) 1 SCC 632 [Paras 11 to 14], Malkiat Singh and
others v. State of Punjab (1991) 4 SCC 341 [Para 11] and other judgments.
51.   It is seen from various judgments that on several instances, court
always received and perused the case diaries/materials collected by the
prosecution during investigation to satisfy itself as to whether the
investigation is proceeding in the right direction or for consideration of the
question of grant of bail etc.
Directorate of Enforcement and another v.
P.V. Prabhakar Rao
(1997) 6 SCC 647, the Supreme Court perused the
records to examine the correctness of the order passed by the High Court
granting bail.
R.K. Krishna Kumar v. State of Assam and others
(1998) 1
SCC 474, the Supreme Court received court diary maintained under
Section 172
Cr.P.C. and perused the case diary to satisfy itself that the
investigation has revealed that the company thereon has funded the
organisation (ULFA) and that the appellants thereon had a role to play in it.
While considering the question of arrest of five well known human rights
activists, journalists, advocates and political workers, in
Romila Thapar and
Others v. Union of India and Others
(2018) 10 SCC 753, this Court perused
the registers containing relevant documents and the case diary produced
by the State of Maharashtra. However, the court avoided to dilate on the
factual position emerging therefrom on the ground that any observation
made thereon might cause prejudice to the accused or to the prosecution in
any manner.
Upholding the validity of Section 172(3) Crl.P.C. and observing
that “there can be no better custodian or guardian of the interest of justice
than the court trying the case”, in
Mukund Lal v. Union of India and another
1989 Supp. (1) SCC 622, the Supreme Court held as under:-
3. …..
“So far as the other parts are concerned, the accused need not
necessarily have a right of access to them because in a criminal trial
or enquiry, whatever is sought to be proved against the accused, will
have to be proved by the evidence other than the diary itself and the
diary can only be used for a very limited purpose by the court or the
police officer as stated above. ………. When in the enquiry or trial,
everything which may appear against the accused has to be
established and brought before the court by evidence other than the
diary and the accused can have the benefit of cross-examining the
witnesses and the court has power to call for the diary and use it, of
course not as evidence but in aid of the enquiry or trial, I am clearly of
the opinion, that the provisions under
Section 172(3)
CrPC cannot be
said to be unconstitutional.”
We fully endorse the reasoning of the High Court and concur with its
conclusion. We are of the opinion that the provision embodied in sub-section
(3) of
Section 172
of the CrPC cannot be characterised as unreasonable or
arbitrary. Under sub-section (2) of
Section 172
CrPC the court itself has the
unfettered power to examine the entries in the diaries. This is a very
important safeguard. The legislature has reposed complete trust in the court
which is conducting the inquiry or the trial. It has empowered the court to call
for any such relevant case diary; if there is any inconsistency or
contradiction arising in the context of the case diary the court can use the
entries for the purpose of contradicting the police officer as provided in sub-
section (3) of
Section 172
of the CrPC. Ultimately there can be no better
custodian or guardian of the interest of justice than the court trying the case.
No court will deny to itself the power to make use of the entries in the diary
to the advantage of the accused by contradicting the police officer with
reference to the contents of the diaries. In view of this safeguard, the charge
of unreasonableness or arbitrariness cannot stand scrutiny. ……. Public
interest demands that such an entry is not made available to the accused for
it might endanger the safety of the informants and it might deter the
informants from giving any information to assist the investigating agency,
…….” [underlining added]
52.   So far as the production of the case diary during trial and reference to
the same by the court and the interdict against accused to call for case
diary is governed by
Section 172
Cr.P.C. As per sub-section (3) of Section
172, neither the accused nor his agent is entitled to call for such case
diaries and also not entitled to see them during the course of enquiry or
trial. The case diaries can be used for refreshing memory by the
investigating officer and court can use it for the purpose of contradicting
such police officer as per provisions of Section 161 or
Section 145
of the
Indian Evidence Act. Unless the investigating officer or the court so uses
the case diary either to refresh the memory or for contradicting the
investigating officer as previous statement under Section 161, after drawing
his attention under Section 145, the entries in case diary cannot be used by
the accused as evidence (vide
Section 172(3)
Cr.P.C.).
53.   It is well-settled that the court can peruse the case diary/materials
collected during investigation by the prosecution even before the
commencement of the trial inter-alia in circumstances like:- (i) to satisfy its
conscience as to whether the investigation is proceeding in the right
direction; (ii) to satisfy itself that the investigation has been conducted in the
right lines and that there is no misuse or abuse of process in the
investigation; (iii) whether regular or anticipatory bail is to be granted to the
accused or not; (iv) whether any further custody of the accused is required
for the prosecution; (v) to satisfy itself as to the correctness of the decision
of the High Court/trial court which is under challenge. The above instances
are only illustrative and not exhaustive.       Where the interest of justice
requires, the court has the powers, to receive the case diary/materials
collected during the investigation. As held in Mukund Lal, ultimately there
can be no better custodian or guardian of the interest of justice than the
court trying the case. Needless to point out that when the Court has
received and perused the documents/materials, it is only for the purpose of
satisfaction of court’s conscience. In the initial stages of investigation, the
Court may not extract or verbatim refer to the materials which the Court has
perused (as has been done in this case by the learned Single Judge) and
make observations which might cause serious prejudice to the accused in
trial and other proceedings resulting in miscarriage of justice.
54.     The Enforcement Directorate has produced the sealed cover before
us containing the materials collected during investigation and the same was
received. Vide order dated 29.08.2019, we have stated that the receipt of
the sealed cover would be subject to our finding whether the court can
peruse the materials or not. As discussed earlier, we have held that the
court     can   receive   the   materials/documents     collected   during   the
investigation and peruse the same to satisfy its conscience that the
investigation is proceeding in the right lines and for the purpose of
consideration of grant of bail/anticipatory bail etc. In the present case,
though sealed cover was received by this Court, we have consciously
refrained from opening the sealed cover and perusing the documents. Lest,
if we peruse the materials collected by the respondent and make some
observations thereon, it might cause prejudice to the appellant and the
other co-accused who are not before this court when they are to pursue the
appropriate relief before various forum. Suffice to note that at present, we
are only at the stage of considering the pre-arrest bail. Since according to
the respondent, they have collected documents/materials for which
custodial interrogation of the appellant is necessary, which we deem
appropriate to accept the submission of the respondent for the limited
purpose of refusing pre-arrest bail to the appellant.
55.     Of course, while considering the request for anticipatory bail and while
perusing the materials/note produced by the Enforcement Directorate/CBI,
the learned Single Judge could have satisfied his conscience to hold that it
is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail. On the other hand, the learned
Single Judge has verbatim quoted the note produced by the respondent-
Enforcement Directorate.      The learned Single Judge, was not right in
extracting the note produced by the Enforcement Directorate/CBI which in
our view, is not a correct approach for consideration of grant/refusal of
anticipatory bail. But such incorrect approach of the learned Single Judge,
in our view, does not affect the correctness of the conclusion in refusing to
grant of anticipatory bail to the appellant in view of all other aspects
considered herein.
Re: Contention:- The appellant should have been confronted with the
materials collected by the Enforcement Directorate earlier, before
being produced to the court.
56.   On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the materials
produced by the Enforcement Directorate could have never been relied
upon for the purpose of consideration of anticipatory bail unless the
appellant was earlier confronted with those documents/materials. It was
submitted that if the appellant’s response was completely “evasive” and
“non co-operative” during the three days when he was interrogated i.e.
19.12.2018, 01.01.2019 and 21.01.2019, the respondent should place
before the court the materials put to the appellant and the responses
elicited from the accused to demonstrate to the court that “the accused was
completely evasive and non-co-operative”.
57.   Contention of the appellant that the court will have to scrutinise the
questions put to the accused during interrogation and answers given by the
appellant and satisfy itself whether the answers were “evasive or not”,
would amount to conducting “mini trial” and substituting court’s view over
the view of the investigating agency about the “cooperation” or
“evasiveness” of the accused and thereafter, the court to decide the
questions of grant of anticipatory bail. This contention is far-fetched and
does not merit acceptance.
58.   As rightly submitted by learned Solicitor General that if the accused
are to be confronted with the materials which were collected by the
prosecution/Enforcement Directorate with huge efforts, it would lead to
devastating consequences and would defeat the very purpose of the
investigation into crimes, in particular, white collar offences.      If the
contention of the appellant is to be accepted, the investigating agency will
have to question each and every accused such materials collected during
investigation and in this process, the investigating agency would be
exposing the evidence collected by them with huge efforts using their men
and resources and this would give a chance to the accused to tamper with
the evidence and to destroy the money trail apart from paving the way for
the accused to influence the witnesses. If the contention of the appellant is
to be accepted that the accused will have to be questioned with the
materials and the investigating agency has to satisfy the court that the
accused was “evasive” during interrogation, the court will have to undertake
a “mini trial” of scrutinizing the matter at intermediary stages of investigation
like interrogation of the accused and the answers elicited from the accused
and to find out whether the answers given by the accused are ‘evasive’ or
whether they are ‘satisfactory’ or not. This could have never been the
intention of the legislature either under PMLA or any other statute.
59.   Interrogation of the accused and the answers elicited from the
accused and the opinion whether the answers given by the accused are
“satisfactory” or “evasive”, is purely within the domain of the investigating
agency and the court cannot substitute its views by conducting mini trial at
various stages of the investigation.
60.   The investigation of a cognizable offence and the various stages
thereon including the interrogation of the accused is exclusively reserved
for the investigating agency whose powers are unfettered so long as the
investigating officer exercises his investigating powers well within the
provisions of the law and the legal bounds. In exercise of its inherent power
under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., the court can interfere and issue appropriate
direction only when the court is convinced that the power of the
investigating officer is exercised mala fide or where there is abuse of power
and non-compliance of the provisions of
Code of Criminal Procedure
However, this power of invoking inherent jurisdiction to issue direction and
interfering with the investigation is exercised only in rare cases where there
is abuse of process or non-compliance of the provisions of
Criminal
Procedure Code
61.
King-Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad
AIR 1945 PC 18 : 1944 SCC
Online PC 29, it was held as under:-
“…..it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary should not interfere with
the police in matters which are within their province and into which the law
imposes upon them the duty of enquiry.
In India as has been shown there is a statutory right on the part of the police
to investigate the circumstances of an alleged cognizable crime without
requiring any authority from the judicial authorities, and it would, as their
Lordships think, be an unfortunate result if it should be held possible to
interfere with those statutory rights by an exercise of the inherent jurisdiction
of the Court. The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary
not overlapping and the combination of individual liberty with a due
observance of law and order is only to be obtained by leaving each to
exercise its own function, always, of course, subject to the right of the Court
to intervene in an appropriate case when moved under S. 491 of the Crl.
P.C. ….” [underlining added]
62.   The above decision in Khwaja Nazir Ahmad has been quoted with
approval by the Supreme Court in
Abhinandan Jha and others v. Dinesh
Mishra
AIR 1968 SC 117 and State of Bihar and another v. J.A.C.
Saldanha and others
(1980) 1 SCC 554. Observing that the investigation of
the offence is the field exclusively reserved for the executive through the
police department and the superintendence over which vests in the State
Government, in J.A.C. Saldanha, it was held as under:-
“25. There is a clear-cut and well demarcated sphere of activity in the field of
crime detection and crime punishment. Investigation of an offence is the field
exclusively reserved for the executive through the police department the
superintendence over which vests in the State Government. The executive
which is charged with a duty to keep vigilance over law and order situation is
obliged to prevent crime and if an offence is alleged to have been committed
it is its bounded duty to investigate into the offence and bring the offender to
book. Once it investigates and finds an offence having been committed it is
its duty to collect evidence for the purpose of proving the offence. Once that
is completed and the investigating officer submits report to the court
requesting the court to take cognizance of the offence under Section 190 of
the Code its duty comes to an end. On a cognizance of the offence being
taken by the court the police function of investigation comes to an end
subject to the provision contained in Section 173(8), there commences the
adjudicatory function of the judiciary to determine whether an offence has
been committed and if so, whether by the person or persons charged with
the crime by the police in its report to the court, and to award adequate
punishment according to law for the offence proved to the satisfaction of the
court. There is thus a well defined and well demarcated function in the field
of crime detection and its subsequent adjudication between the police and
the Magistrate. This had been recognised way back in
King Emperor v.
Khwaja Nazir Ahmad
AIR 1944 PC 18 ……...”.
The same view was reiterated in
Dukhishyam Benupani, Asstt. Director,
Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria
(1998) 1 SCC 52,
M.C. Abraham and Another v. State of Maharashtra and Others (
2003) 2
SCC 649, Subramanian Swamy v. Director, Central Bureau of Investigation
and another
2014) 8 SCC 682 and Divine Retreat Centre v. State of Kerala
and Others
(2008) 3 SCC 542.
63.   Investigation into crimes is the prerogative of the police and excepting
in rare cases, the judiciary should keep out all the areas of investigation.
State of Bihar and another v. P.P. Sharma, IAS and another
1992 Supp. (1)
222, it was held that “The investigating officer is an arm of the law and
plays a pivotal role in the dispensation of criminal justice and maintenance
of law and order. …..Enough power is therefore given to the police officer in
the area of investigating process and granting them the court latitude to
exercise its discretionary power to make a successful investigation…”.
Dukhishyam Benupani, Asstt. Director, Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v.
Arun Kumar Bajoria
(1998) 1 SCC 52, this Court held that “……it is not the
function of the court to monitor investigation processes so long as such
investigation does not transgress any provision of law. It must be left to the
investigating agency to decide the venue, the timings and the questions
and the manner of putting such questions to persons involved in such
offences. A blanket order fully insulating a person from arrest would make
his interrogation a mere ritual.”
64.   As held by the Supreme Court in a catena of judgments that there is a
well-defined and demarcated function in the field of investigation and its
subsequent adjudication. It is not the function of the court to monitor the
investigation process so long as the investigation does not violate any
provision of law. It must be left to the discretion of the investigating agency
to decide the course of investigation. If the court is to interfere in each and
every stage of the investigation and the interrogation of the accused, it
would affect the normal course of investigation. It must be left to the
investigating agency to proceed in its own manner in interrogation of the
accused, nature of questions put to him and the manner of interrogation of
the accused.
65.   It is one thing to say that if the power of investigation has been
exercised by an investigating officer mala fide or non-compliance of the
provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code
in the conduct of the
investigation, it is open to the court to quash the proceedings where there is
a clear case of abuse of power. It is a different matter that the High Court in
exercise of its inherent power under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., the court can
always issue appropriate direction at the instance of an aggrieved person if
the High Court is convinced that the power of investigation has been
exercised by the investigating officer mala fide and not in accordance with
the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code
. However, as pointed out
earlier that power is to be exercised in rare cases where there is a clear
abuse of power and non-compliance of the provisions falling under
Chapter-XII of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
requiring the interference of
the High Court. In the initial stages of investigation where the court is
considering the question of grant of regular bail or pre-arrest bail, it is not
for the court to enter into the demarcated function of the investigation and
collection   of   evidence/materials   for   establishing   the   offence   and
interrogation of the accused and the witnesses.
66.   Whether direction to produce the transcripts could be issued:-
Contention of the appellant is that it has not been placed before the court
as to what were the questions/aspects on which the appellant was
interrogated   on   19.12.2018,   01.01.2019    and   21.01.2019     and   the
Enforcement Directorate has not been able to show as to how the answers
given by the appellant are “evasive”. It was submitted that the investigating
agency-Enforcement Directorate cannot expect the accused to give
answers in the manner they want and the investigating agency should
always keep in their mind the rights of the accused protected under
Article
20(3)
of the Constitution of India. Since the interrogation of the accused
and the questions put to the accused and the answers given by the
accused are part of the investigation which is purely within the domain of
the investigation officer, unless satisfied that the police officer has
improperly and illegally exercised his investigating powers in breach of any
statutory provision, the court cannot interfere.    In the present case, no
direction could be issued to the respondent to produce the transcripts of the
questions put to the appellant and answers given by the appellant.
Grant of Anticipatory bail in exceptional cases:-
67.   Ordinarily, arrest is a part of procedure of the investigation to secure
not only the presence of the accused but several other purposes. Power
under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is an extraordinary power and the same has to
be exercised sparingly.     The privilege of the pre-arrest bail should be
granted only in exceptional cases. The judicial discretion conferred upon
the court has to be properly exercised after application of mind as to the
nature and gravity of the accusation; possibility of applicant fleeing justice
and other factors to decide whether it is a fit case for grant of anticipatory
bail. Grant of anticipatory bail to some extent interferes in the sphere of
investigation of an offence and hence, the court must be circumspect while
exercising such power for grant of anticipatory bail. Anticipatory bail is not
to be granted as a matter of rule and it has to be granted only when the
court is convinced that exceptional circumstances exist to resort to that
extraordinary remedy.
68.   On behalf of the appellant, much arguments were advanced
contending that anticipatory bail is a facet of
Article 21
of the Constitution of
India. It was contended that unless custodial interrogation is warranted, in
the facts and circumstances of the case, denial of anticipatory bail would
amount to denial of the right conferred upon the appellant under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
69.
Article 21
of the Constitution of India states that no person shall be
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure
prescribed by law.     However, the power conferred by
Article 21
of the
Constitution of India is not unfettered and is qualified by the later part of the
Article i.e. “…except according to a procedure prescribed by law.” In
State
of M.P. and another v. Ram Kishna Balothia and another
(1995) 3 SCC 221,
the Supreme Court held that the right of anticipatory bail is not a part of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India and held as under:-
“7. ……We find it difficult to accept the contention that
Section 438
of the
Code of Criminal Procedure is an integral part of
Article 21.
In the first place,
there was no provision similar to Section 438 in the old
Criminal Procedure
Code
. The Law Commission in its 41st Report recommended introduction of a
provision for grant of anticipatory bail. It observed:
“We agree that this would be a useful advantage. Though we must
add that it is in very exceptional cases that such power should be
exercised.”
In the light of this recommendation, Section 438 was incorporated, for the first
time, in the
Criminal Procedure Code
of 1973. Looking to the cautious
recommendation of the Law Commission, the power to grant anticipatory bail
is conferred only on a Court of Session or the High Court. Also, anticipatory
bail cannot be granted as a matter of right. It is essentially a statutory right
conferred long after the coming into force of the Constitution. It cannot be
considered as an essential ingredient of
Article 21
of the Constitution. And its
non-application to a certain special category of offences cannot be considered
as violative of Article 21.” [underlining added]
70.   We are conscious of the fact that the legislative intent behind the
introduction of
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is to safeguard the individual’s personal
liberty and to protect him from the possibility of being humiliated and from
being subjected to unnecessary police custody. However, the court must
also keep in view that a criminal offence is not just an offence against an
individual, rather the larger societal interest is at stake.       Therefore, a
delicate balance is required to be established between the two rights -
safeguarding the personal liberty of an individual and the societal interest. It
cannot be said that refusal to grant anticipatory bail would amount to denial
of the rights conferred upon the appellant under
Article 21
of the
Constitution of India.
71.   The learned Solicitor General has submitted that depending upon the
facts of each case, it is for the investigating agency to confront the accused
with the material, only when the accused is in custody. It was submitted that
the statutory right under
Section 19
of PMLA has an in-built safeguard
against arbitrary exercise of power of arrest by the investigating officer.
Submitting that custodial interrogation is a recognised mode of interrogation
which is not only permissible but has been held to be more effective, the
learned Solicitor General
placed reliance upon
State Rep. By The CBI v.
Anil Sharma (1997) 7 SCC 187;
Sudhir v. State of Maharashtra and
Another
(2016) 1 SCC 146; and Assistant Director, Directorate of
Enforcement v. Hassan Ali Khan (2011) 12 SCC 684.
72.   Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of the investigation intended
to secure several purposes. There may be circumstances in which the
accused may provide information leading to discovery of material facts and
relevant   information.   Grant   of   anticipatory   bail   may   hamper   the
investigation. Pre-arrest bail is to strike a balance between the individual’s
right to personal freedom and the right of the investigating agency to
interrogate the accused as to the material so far collected and to collect
more information which may lead to recovery of relevant information. In
State Rep. By The CBI v. Anil Sharma (1997) 7 SCC 187, the Supreme
Court held as under:-
“6. We find force in the submission of the CBI that custodial interrogation is
qualitatively more elicitation-oriented than questioning a suspect who is well
ensconced with a favourable order under Section 438 of the Code. In a case
like this effective interrogation of a suspected person is of tremendous
advantage in disinterring many useful informations and also materials which
would have been concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if
the suspected person knows that he is well protected and insulated by a
pre-arrest bail order during the time he is interrogated. Very often
interrogation in such a condition would reduce to a mere ritual. The
argument that the custodial interrogation is fraught with the danger of the
person being subjected to third-degree methods need not be countenanced,
for, such an argument can be advanced by all accused in all criminal cases.
The Court has to presume that responsible police officers would conduct
themselves in a responsible manner and that those entrusted with the task
of disinterring offences would not conduct themselves as offenders.”
73.   Observing that the arrest is a part of the investigation intended to
secure several purposes, in
Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B.
(2005) 4 SCC
303, it was held as under:-
“19. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of investigation intended to
secure several purposes. The accused may have to be questioned in detail
regarding various facets of motive, preparation, commission and aftermath
of the crime and the connection of other persons, if any, in the crime. There
may be circumstances in which the accused may provide information
leading to discovery of material facts. It may be necessary to curtail his
freedom in order to enable the investigation to proceed without hindrance
and to protect witnesses and persons connected with the victim of the crime,
to prevent his disappearance, to maintain law and order in the locality. For
these or other reasons, arrest may become an inevitable part of the process
of investigation. The legality of the proposed arrest cannot be gone into in an
application under Section 438 of the Code. The role of the investigator is
well defined and the jurisdictional scope of interference by the court in the
process of investigation is limited. The court ordinarily will not interfere with
the investigation of a crime or with the arrest of the accused in a cognizable
offence. An interim order restraining arrest, if passed while dealing with an
application under Section 438 of the Code will amount to interference in the
investigation, which cannot, at any rate, be done under Section 438 of the
Code.”
74.
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra and Others
(2011) 1 SCC 694, the Supreme Court laid down the factors and
parameters to be considered while dealing with anticipatory bail. It was held
that the nature and the gravity of the accusation and the exact role of the
accused must be properly comprehended before arrest is made and that
the court must evaluate the available material against the accused very
carefully. It was also held that the court should also consider whether the
accusations have been made only with the object of injuring or humiliating
the applicant by arresting him or her.
75.   After referring to Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre and other judgments
and observing that anticipatory bail can be granted only in exceptional
circumstances, in
Jai Prakash Singh v. State of Bihar and another
(2012) 4
SCC 379, the Supreme Court held as under:-
“19. Parameters for grant of anticipatory bail in a serious offence are
required to be satisfied and further while granting such relief, the court must
record the reasons therefor. Anticipatory bail can be granted only in
exceptional circumstances where the court is prima facie of the view that the
applicant has falsely been enroped in the crime and would not misuse his
liberty. (See
D.K. Ganesh Babu v. P.T. Manokaran
2007) 4 SCC 434, State
of Maharashtra v. Mohd. Sajid Husain Mohd. S. Husain
2008) 1 SCC 213
and Union of India v. Padam Narain Aggarwal
(2008) 13 SCC 305.)”
Economic Offences:-
76.   Power under
Section 438
Cr.P.C. being an extraordinary remedy, has
to be exercised sparingly; more so, in cases of economic offences.
Economic offences stand as a different class as they affect the economic
fabric of the society.
Directorate of Enforcement v. Ashok Kumar Jain
(1998) 2 SCC 105, it was held that in economic offences, the accused is
not entitled to anticipatory bail.
77.   The learned Solicitor General submitted that the “Scheduled offence”
and “offence of money laundering” are independent of each other and
PMLA being a special enactment applicable to the offence of money
laundering is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail.              The learned
Solicitor General submitted that money laundering being an economic
offence committed with much planning and deliberate design poses a
serious threat to the nation’s economy and financial integrity and in order to
unearth the laundering and trail of money, custodial interrogation of the
appellant is necessary.
78.   Observing that economic offence is committed with deliberate design
with an eye on personal profit regardless to the consequence to the
community, in State of Gujarat v. Mohanlal Jitamalji Porwal and others
(1987) 2 SCC 364, it was held as under:-
“5. ….The entire community is aggrieved if the economic offenders who ruin
the economy of the State are not brought to book. A murder may be
committed in the heat of moment upon passions being aroused. An
economic offence is committed with cool calculation and deliberate design
with an eye on personal profit regardless of the consequence to the
community. A disregard for the interest of the community can be manifested
only at the cost of forfeiting the trust and faith of the community in the
system to administer justice in an even-handed manner without fear of
criticism from the quarters which view white collar crimes with a permissive
eye unmindful of the damage done to the national economy and national
interest…..”
79.   Observing that economic offences constitute a class apart and need
to be visited with different approach in the matter of bail, in
Y.S. Jagan
Mohan Reddy v. CBI
(2013) 7 SCC 439, the Supreme Court held as under:-
“34. Economic offences constitute a class apart and need to be visited with
a different approach in the matter of bail. The economic offences having
deep-rooted conspiracies and involving huge loss of public funds need to be
viewed seriously and considered as grave offences affecting the economy of
the country as a whole and thereby posing serious threat to the financial
health of the country.
35. While granting bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of
accusations, the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the
punishment which conviction will entail, the character of the accused,
circumstances which are peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of
securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension
of the witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the public/State
and other similar considerations.” [underlining added]
80.
Referring to Dukhishyam Benupani, Assistant Director, Enforcement
Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria
(1998) 1 SCC 52, in
Enforcement Officer, Ted, Bombay v. Bher Chand Tikaji Bora and others
(1999) 5 SCC 720, while hearing an appeal by the Enforcement Directorate
against the order of the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court granting
anticipatory bail to the respondent thereon, the Supreme Court set aside
the order of the Single Judge granting anticipatory bail.
81.   Grant of anticipatory bail at the stage of investigation may frustrate the
investigating agency in interrogating the accused and in collecting the
useful information and also the materials which might have been
concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the accused knows
that he is protected by the order of the court. Grant of anticipatory bail,
particularly in economic offences would definitely hamper the effective
investigation. Having regard to the materials said to have been collected by
the respondent-Enforcement Directorate and considering the stage of the
investigation, we are of the view that it is not a fit case to grant anticipatory
bail.
82.     In a case of money-laundering where it involves many stages of
“placement”, “layering i.e. funds moved to other institutions to conceal
origin” and “interrogation i.e. funds used to acquire various assets”, it
requires systematic and analysed investigation which would be of great
advantage. As held in Anil Sharma, success in such interrogation would
elude if the accused knows that he is protected by a pre-arrest bail order.
Section 438
Cr.P.C. is to be invoked only in exceptional cases where the
case alleged is frivolous or groundless. In the case in hand, there are
allegations of laundering the proceeds of the crime. The Enforcement
Directorate claims to have certain specific inputs from various sources,
including overseas banks. Letter rogatory is also said to have been issued
and some response have been received by the department. Having regard
to the nature of allegations and the stage of the investigation, in our view,
the investigating agency has to be given sufficient freedom in the process
of investigation. Though we do not endorse the approach of the learned
Single Judge in extracting the note produced by the Enforcement
Directorate, we do not find any ground warranting interference with the
impugned order. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, in
our view, grant of anticipatory bail to the appellant will hamper the
investigation and this is not a fit case for exercise of discretion to grant
anticipatory bail to the appellant.
83.   In the result, the appeal is dismissed. It is for the appellant to work
out his remedy in accordance with law. As and when the application for
regular bail is filed, the same shall be considered by the learned trial court
on its own merits and in accordance with law without being influenced by
any of the observations made in this judgment and the impugned order of
the High Court.
…………………………..J.
[R. BANUMATHI]
…………………………..J.
[A.S. BOPANNA]
New Delhi;
September 05, 2019